HOW TO WRITE
MACINTOSH
SOFTWARE

HOW TO WRITE
MACINTOSH
SOFTWARE
The Debugging Reference for Macintosh®
Third Edition

Scott Knaster

A
vv
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company

Reading, Massachusetts
Don Mills, Ontario
Sydney
Paris

Singapore

Seoul

Milan

Menlo Park, California

Wokingham, England
Tokyo

Madrid

Mexico City

SanJuan

Taipei

New York

Amsterdam

Bonn

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products
are claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book and
Addison-Wesley was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been printed in
initial capital letters.

The authors and publisher have taken care in preparation of this book, but make no
expressed or implied warranty of any kind and assume no responsibility for errors or
omissions. No liability is assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection
with or arising out of the use of the information or programs contained herein.

ISBN 0-201-60805-7

Copyright © 1992 by Scott Knaster

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the
publisher. Printed in the United States of America. Published simultaneously in Canada.
Sponsoring Editor: David Rogelberg
Technical Reviewer: Jim Reekes
Project Editor: Joanne Clapp Fullagar
Cover Illustration: Angelo Torres
Cover Design: Jean Seal

Set in 10-point Palatino by Publication Services, Inc.
2345 6-MW-96959493

Second printing, August 1993

Addison-Wesley books are available for bulk purchases by corporations,

institutions, and other organizations. For more information please contact the
Corporate, Government and Special Sales Department at (617) 944-3700 x 2915.

Contents

Acknowledgments

xiii

Introduction

Xv

About This Book

xix

PART ONE

Chapter1

How It All Works

Getting Started

1

3

Different

3

The ROM

5

Everything you know is wrong

7

How to get there from here

9

Resources

10

Building our application

12

Other kinds of programs

16

Power tools

17

Vil

Vill

Contents

Chapter2

Things in Memory

21

Fables

21

That amazing moving memory

22

Allocating memory

26

Heaps

27

Purging

34.

How relocation works

35

Explicit dereferencing

39

Implicit dereferencing

45

Chapter3

55

More About Heaps and Fragmentation

What does “Out of Memory” really mean?

aye)

Blocks in heaps

62

Heap zone header

62

Heap block header

64

Master pointers

67

Using the Memory Manager

69

Reducing fragmentation

71

Segmenting your application

74

Unloading your segments

76

PART TWO

79

Chapter4

Debugging

Debugging Macintosh Software

81

Bugs

81

Kinds of bugs

82

Why system errors don’t tell you very much

83

The art of debugging

84

Debugging questions

85

Debugging tools

91

Hardware debuggers

94

Contents

Common crashes

95

Some advice on debugging

100

Chapter5

103

Examining Compiled Code

Compilers

103

Allocating space for data

106

Stack frames

110

Parameters

116

Statements and variables

122

Chapter 6

141

More about Compiled Code

Procedure and function calls

141

Conditional statements

162

Repetitive statements

168

With statements

172

Linked routines

173

Standard library routines

176

ROM interface routines

176

The jump table

180

Format of jump table entries

182

Miscellaneous things in your object code

186

Summary

187

Chapter7

Real Live Debugging

What we'll do

189

189

Running the program

198

Watching more closely

206

Looking for the bus error

213

Finding the text bug

217

Finding the window-erase bug

219

Looking for more bugs

221

1X

Contents

Optimizing with the debugger

231

Objects in the heap

244

opecial free bonus

249

PART THREE

261

Chapter 8

Tips, Tricks, and Techniques

General Techniques

263

Preflighting

263

How to get around Pascal's Type Checking

266

Which registers you can use

268

Chapter9

271

Toolbox Techniques

Writing a definition function in a high-level language

271

Logical clipping

272

Using ResErrProc

273

Moving a resource from one file to another

275

The easy way to smooth animation

281

Automatic window updating

283

Textedit hooks

295

Resuming from system errors

297

Chapter 10

301

Operating System Techniques

How ROM calls work

301

Random access file I/O

302

When your application ends

309

Keeping things around between applications

310

Contents

APPENDICES

313

Appendix A

Assembly Language Overview

315

Appendix B

Common Problems

345

Appendix C

Ancient History

355

Appendix D

Debugging Quick Reference Guide

377

Glossary

403

Index

413

Xi

Acknowledgments

Without these people, this book would not exist, and you would now be staring at
nothing and looking very silly.
Jim Friedlander of Macintosh Technical Support provided massive help. He

read the entire manuscript several times and kept me honest; he wrote most of the
programs in Part Three; and he helped me keep up my energy level with his

enthusiasm.

Keith Rollin, coauthor of the second edition of Macintosh Programming Secrets
and all-round Talented Gent, was invaluable in helping me figure out what had
changed in the Macintosh world since the previous edition of this book appeared.

Jean Seal of Addison-Wesley worked way beyond the call of duty with artist
Angelo Torres to create the incredible cover that you see gracing this book.
Carole McClendon and Steve Stansel helped fulfill this book’s destiny of being
published by Addison-Wesley, thus making it the only Macintosh book to be published in three editions under three different publishers (not my fault).

Martha Steffen, Apple Publishing Evangelist, helped me figure out how to get

started and what was happening to me along the way.
Scot Kamins, Writéur, encouraged me, told me funny jokes, and gave me a

great review. I also stole ideas from his books.

Caroline Rose inspired me by being the best technical writer I’ve ever known,
and by writing Inside Macintosh, without which no other Macintosh technical books

would be possible.
Cary Clark and Russ Daniels were very smart (and still are) and taught mea

lot

of the stuff that appears in this book.
Bryan Stearns, Ginger Jernigan, Mark Baumwell, Louella Pizzuti, Bill Dawson,
and Rick Blair of Apple Technical Support put up with me whenever I rambled on

about this book.

Xi11

X1V

Acknowledgments

Chris Espinosa invented the tree-crash metaphor used in Chapter 4, which is
used with his permission, whether he knows it or not.
Alain Rossmann gave me valuable ideas for the Techniques section and provided lots of enthusiasm.
Brian McGhie, the Gatekeeper of Low Memory, helped me figure out what was

going on in system globalville.
Mike McGrath gave me great advice on how to write a book and get it published and loaned me his copy of Author Law.

Guy Kawasaki changed my life, and I have the bumper sticker to prove it.
Barbara Knaster created many of the figures, constructed Appendix D, fixed
lots of stuff, and, most important, told me to do it and made me do it.

Introduction

This book is for people who want to write software for the Macintosh. It’s not an
introductory book; you should be experienced in (or in the process of learning) a
high-level language such as Pascal or C, or assembly language. It also helps to be
familiar with the basics of how Macintosh programs are written. If you don’t have

that kind of experience, a good sense of adventure will definitely help. If you’ve read

or even skimmed the Macintosh Programming Primer books by Dave Mark and Cartwright Reed or Inside Macintosh from Apple, you'll benefit from this book.

What this book will tell you
What's in this book that’s not in the others just mentioned? This book explains lots

of the mysteries and myths about Macintosh programming that aren't really cov-

ered anywhere else. It talks about how and where things are stored in memory. It
discusses what things in memory may be moved around, and teaches you how to

know exactly when they may be moved. It explains how to debug your applications using available debugging tools. It shows you how to examine your program's

code to learn precisely what's going on when it runs. It also gives you dozens of facts,
tips, and tricks that you can use to make your software more powerful.

How this book was written
In my three years in the Developer Technical Support group at Apple, I worked
with hundreds of programmers in helping them write and debug their software.

I've tried to put as much of my experience as possible into this book. I’ve also putin

a lot of stuff that we’ve taught developers in our MacCollege training course at Apple.

XV

XV1

Introduction

I wrote this book with several principles in mind:
No mysteries. I’ve tried very hard to explain things that people find confusing

or puzzling about Macintosh programming and to leave nothing significant
unexplained that’s within the book's scope.
No fuzziness. There’s nothing more irritating than a book that takes you to the
brink of a great revelation, then wimps out with fuzzy, vague writing. This

usually makes it obvious that the writer doesn’t know any more and is trying to
get on to the next topic. I've tried to avoid fuzziness by explaining things in

depth.
No wizards. Sure, some people are smarter than others. It’s not right, though, to
withhold potentially useful information because you don’t trust people to use it

correctly. I've tried to refrain from holding back information. Ifit’s a bad idea to
use a particular feature or technique, I won't just say “don’t,” I'll tell you why.

All work and no fun is no fun. While we're going over all this stuff, it’s a good
idea to have some fun, too, so I've tried to keep the mood light enough to keep
you awake, even while we work through the heavy subjects.
If you use the information presented in this book, you'll know an awful lot
about the Macintosh, and your programs will be better. There’s enough information presented here that you may not absorb all of it as you read it through. Don’t
worry about that. You can reread it as many times as you like, at no extra charge.
The Macintosh has gained quite a reputation for requiring a lot from a programmer. For various reasons, it was incredibly hard to create Macintosh software

when the computer first appeared in January of 1984. In the years that have passed
since then, lots of things have happened to make Macintosh programminga

little

easier:

Dozens of programming languages and tools have been developed, most of

them coming from outside of Apple. There are compilers for many languages,
powerful debuggers, disk patching tools, and more.
More technical material on the Macintosh has been created. Apple has pro-

duced Inside Macintosh and technical notes, and many good (and bad) books on
Macintosh programming have appeared.

The general level of knowledge in the programming community (wherever
that may be—I think it’s near Berkeley) has increased tremendously as Macintosh programmers everywhere have gotten smarter.
The Macintosh itself has become more powerful. The first Macintosh had 128K

bytes of RAM and 800K of disk space, if you were lucky enough to have an
external disk drive. Today, you can get just about as much speed and power as

you want to pay for, including over 100 megabytes of RAM, gigabytes of hard
disk space, and very zippy microprocessors.

Introduction

still, there are some things about Macintosh programming that aren’t well

known and aren’t written down anywhere. In this book, I’ve tried to gather
together lots of “mysterious” things and take all the mystery out of them. As you
read, you'll discover that things aren’t so hard to understand after all—they’re just

not well known.

XVI

About This Book

This book is divided into three parts, plus appendices. Here’s what you'll find:
Part One is called How It All Works. This part of the book concentrates on
general information about the Macintosh and how to program it, with an in-depth

discussion on how things in RAM behave and misbehave.
Chapter 1, Getting Started, talks about what makes Macintosh programming
different and presents a brief overview of development tools.
Chapter 2, Things in Memory, tells about the way things are stored in memory,
what happens to them, and how you can manage them.
Chapter 3, More about Heaps and Fragmentation, describes some common
memory management problems and how to avoid them.

Part Two is called Debugging, which kinda tells you what it’s about.
Chapter 4, Debugging Macintosh Software, introduces some general thoughts

about debugging, tells about MacsBug, and presents information about many of
the most common problems that Macintosh programmers run into.

Chapter 5, Examining Compiled Code, shows you how to look at the object
code produced by your high-level language program.
Chapter 6, More about Compiled Code, continues directly from Chapter 5, but

it would have made one big, obnoxious chapter if it had been all together, so it’s not.
Chapter 7, Real Live Debugging, presents a sample program that has bugs in it

and then uses an object code debugger to find and fix the problems.
Part Three is called Tips, Tricks, and Techniques, and it’s got some of each of
those, including a few sample programs.

Chapter 8, General Techniques, presents stuff that’s generally useful if you’re
writing Macintosh software.

Chapter 9, Toolbox Techniques, contains information on some goodies that
will help you make better use of the Macintosh’s User Interface Toolbox.

xix

XX

About This Book

Chapter 10, Operating System Techniques, covers some good things to know
about various parts of the Macintosh Operating System.

Appendix A, Assembly Language Overview, is very important if you're not
familiar with 68000 assembly language. To use an object code debugger, you

should be able to read 68000 code and understand what's going on. You don’t have
to be able to write assembly language. This appendix will tell you what all those
strange instructions mean. You can read this appendix before reading Part Two or
at any point that you think you need it. Even if you're already a 68000 programmer,

you might want to read it to learn some fine points.

Don’t forget about Appendix A. When you start to come across assembly
language information that’s unfamiliar to you, try reading Appendix A. It
should helpa lot.

Appendix B, Common Problems, lists some of the most common (and most
fatal) errors that can cause a Macintosh programmer to lose sleep.

Appendix C, Ancient History, contains information that may be of interest to
those who want to know how some Macintosh things worked long ago. Why,
whenI started programming the Macintosh, I used to have to walk sixteen miles
through a driving Cupertino snowstorm just to use a C compiler. You young folks
today have it so easy!

Appendix D, Debugging Quick Reference Guide, contains some charts that
you may find handy when you're debugging.
At the end of the book you'll find the obligatory glossary of whizzy terms.

Conventions used in this book
All words in the text that are in boldface, can be found in the glossary.

Hexadecimal numbers are always preceded by a dollar sign, like this:
$388

—$42

$40F7A2.

Numbers not preceded by a dollar sign are decimal numbers unless otherwise
stated.
Calls to routines in the Macintosh User Interface Toolbox and Operating System are referred to as system calls, ROM calls, traps, or A-traps, depending on the
context. All these terms mean the same thing.

About This Book

Information.

XXx1

A paragraph that looks like this is an incidental note. It con-

tains information that’s interesting and useful, but not vital to the material.

Warning.

A paragraph marked with this icon is a warning. Imagine the
robot on Lost in Space saying, ““danger, Will Robinson!”

Fact.

A sentence that looks like this
is an important, simple truth that you

should know. These sentences present facts that help to take the mystery out
of Macintosh programming.

Things to remember.

This icon, found at the end of each chapter, marks a

The amazing colossal disclaimer
There’s a lot of technical information in this book. It’s been reviewed carefully by

several people, and all the known problems have been fixed. Just as with software,
though, there may be undiscovered bugs. Also, as the Macintosh world evolves,
things change. If you find anything wrong, I would very much appreciate it if you
would write to me about it in care of the publisher.

What you need to use this book
To make the most of this book, you should be somewhat familiar with Pascal or C.
You should also have access to a copy of Inside Macintosh, the technical reference
manual for the Macintosh computers.

1D
19

XXil

About This Book

In Part Two, we will spend a lot of time looking at programs with a debugger.
The debugger that’s used for the examples is MacsBug, the debugger that Apple

distributes.

This book presents a lot of specific information, such as examples of how
compilers compile code. Although this specific information is very useful, you
should realize that this book’s true mission is to tell you that you should observe

your program’s behavior closely and figure out for yourself what’s going on. In
particular, the compiled code examples given in Part Two are correct for MPW
Pascal and C (version 3.2) but may be different for other Pascal and C compilers. The

only way to know how your compiler does things is to look at the code it produces.

How to learn more
The best way to learn more about Macintosh programming is to write programs! A

good source of information is your local users’ group. Many users’ groups have
special-interest groups for programmers, and most groups publish newsletters.

You might also want to join an on-line bulletin-board service. These services
are frequented by Macintosh fanatics who are able to answer almost any Macintosh
programming question, or at least point you in the right direction. These services

also contain lots of public domain software that you can download, including the
latest goodies from Apple.

There are also some good books available, including some specifically for Pascal, C, or assembly language programming on the Macintosh. More books are
appearing constantly, so keep checking your favorite bookstore.
One reason there’s so much third-party software that runs on Apple comput-

ers is that Apple has a lot of programs that help developers in a variety of ways.
These programs include marketing assistance, developer-programmer matchmaking, technical support, and more. In addition, Apple distributes lots of different

products, like technical documentation and software tools, through channels other
than your neighborhood computer store. The most important source for information and tools is the Apple Programmers and Developers Association (APDA). You

can get more information by calling APDA at 800-282-2732. Apple also licenses its

system software (like the Finder and the System file) so that you can ship this

software on your disks.
There’s so much stuff available from Apple that it can get confusing. If you

need to find out anything about Apple’s programs for developers or technical
products, you can write to Apple Computer, Inc., Developer Programs, 20525 Mariani Avenue, Cupertino, California 95014.

Also, it’s a good idea to develop a nice, quiet hobby unrelated to programming,
so that you can relax for a while. Sky diving, for example.

About This Book

Notes for the third edition
You're reading the third edition of this book, which was published in the spring of
1992. The first edition came out in prehistoric times, September of 1986, and the

second edition appeared back in August of 1988. Here’s a summary of the most
significant changes from the second edition:
Everything was brought up to date to reflect the new world of hardware and

software, including changes for the Quadra and PowerBook lines, as well as
System 7 and 32-bit addressing. Everything that didn’t work was either fixed or
thrown out.

MacsBug grew up since the second edition. Because of this and because MacsBug is pretty much everywhere, it’s now used as this book’s debugger of
choice.

There are still more new jokes, new puns, new obscure song references, and
here and there I changed a word just to make it better or more interesting. It still

astonishes me that after having read the words in this book fifty times or more,
I still found some typos, whichI fixed, too.

I’m thrilled to say that this book is now published by Addison-Wesley, makers

of Inside Macintosh, the Macintosh Inside Out series, and lots of other cool stuff.
To give you an idea of just how wacky these folks are, they were the ones who
suggested that we get an artist from Mad magazine to do the cover. These are
people I can understand!

Xxill

P

A

R

T

ON

E

How It All Works
CHAPTER 1

Getting Started

CHAPTER 2

Things in Memory

CHAPTER 3

More about Heaps and Fragmentation

Wha-a?
— Superman, Action Comics #1, June 1938

C

H

A

P

T

E

R

1

Getting Started
In this chapter, we'll talk about what makes Macintosh programming different, and

we'll briefly go over some of the tools available to help you write Macintosh software.

Different
Macintosh programs don’t look or feel like programs on other, conventional com-

puters. The Macintosh’s user interface, which makes heavy use of graphics, gives
its software a distinctive look. These days, lots of other personal computers can

have applications that look like Macintosh programs, but the Macintosh is the only

system that was expressly designed from the ground up for software with this kind
of user interface.
Conventional computers have a screen format that shows 24 lines of 80 characters each and have the capability of sending those characters to a printer. If
you've programmed a personal computer, you probably know how to put your

display screen into a graphics mode, which allows you to draw lines and pictures
in addition to (or instead of) text.

When you start to learn about Macintosh, you begin to discover that somebody
has changed the rules on you. The 24-by-80 text screen is gone; instead, there are
scrollable, resizable windows. At the top of the screen is a list of words, the menu
bar, which suggests things that you can do, like “File” or “Edit.” You’ve probably
also noticed lots of dialog boxes—they’re the little windows that appear and ask you
about things, like what name to use when you save a document, or whether you really
want to quit an application. If you’ve used even a couple of Macintosh applications,

or programmeda few, all these user-interface goodies should be familiar to you.

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

One of the most famous Macintosh concepts is the icon, or picture. If you read
some of the computer trade magazines, you often see Macintosh referred to as

being an “icon-based’” system or having an “iconic’’ operating system. These
phrases should immediately clue you in to the fact that the writer probably hasn’t
used a Macintosh very much. Icons are just a part of the Macintosh user interface;
most applications use them infrequently. Windows and pull-down menus are the
real guts of the user interface.

The first thing most people ever see on a Macintosh is something like Figure 1-1.
This screen, of course, is from the Finder, the program you normally see when you
start up a Macintosh. The Finder uses icons to show disks, applications, documents,
and folders. It also uses a trash-can icon as a destination for things to be thrown
away or deleted.

Your application can use icons, too, if you want, but you'll probably get a lot

more play out of windows and menus when designing your user interface.
Over the years, the Finder has evolved, first adding multitasking capabilities
with the creation of MultiFinder, then retaining those multitasking features as the
MultiFinder features burrowed their way into the Macintosh Operating System itself.

“

@

File

11 items

Edit

View

Label

134.9 MB in disk

Special

@B

DD

61.5 MB available

134.9 MB in disk

SH

specific magic

general magic

=

other magic

Figure 1-1.

Finder display

61.5 MB

Chapter1

Getting Started

The ROM
If the Finder is not Macintosh’s Operating System, what is the OS? What does it

look like? Where is it? How is it called by programs? Well, when you're writing
software, parts of the Macintosh operating system will probably look similar to
other systems you may have used. There’s a File Manager, with calls to create,

delete, open, close, read from, write to, and get information about files and disks.
There are device drivers to control the disk drives, serial ports, printer, and sound

capabilities. There’s a Memory Manager to control the allocation of chunks of
RAM. Most of the Macintosh Operating System is pretty conventional (in contrast

to the very unconventional user interface).
The Macintosh OS takes up part of the computer's ROM. Many computers put

some low-level portion of the system in ROM and then load in more of the OS
when the system is started. Macintosh roughly follows this pattern, except that it’s
got more of the OS in its ROM than most systems do. There’s also some system stuff

kept in a file on the disk called System. For a disk to boot, it has to have that file.
There will be more information later on what’s in the System file.
The Macintosh’s Operating System takes up only a fraction of the ROM. What

really makes the Macintosh unique is the code that’s in the rest of the ROM. It’s
called the User Interface Toolbox, and it consists of hundreds of callable routines

that are used to implement the windows, menus, dialog boxes, buttons, icons, and
all the other familiar trappings that give the Macintosh its personality. At the heart

of the User Interface Toolbox (usually just called the Toolbox) is QuickDraw, the
magic artist that lets you draw almost anything you want on the Macintosh’s
screen.

The Macintosh ROM has grown and changed significantly over the years. The

original ROM was 64K and provided the fundamental Macintosh personality that
we still know and love: menus, windows, controls, and so on. Later versions added
the hierarchical file system, fancier text editing, enhanced versions of QuickDraw,
and support for 32-bit addressing.
In Figure 1-2, you'll see the pieces of the system and where they come from. In
the rest of this chapter, we’ll talk about how the Macintosh uses somewhat unfamiliar techniques to accomplish familiar computing tasks in a spectacular way and
how to make sure the results are what you want.

MultiFinder and Process Manager
The Macintosh was originally designed to allow exactly one application in the
computer at any time. When you started MacPaint from the Finder, the Finder
went away completely. When you quit MacPaint, it vanished and the Finder was
loaded back in. Moving between two applications was pretty tedious this way.
Obviously, someone realized that it would really be great if you could have
more than one application hanging around at a time. This is exactly what Andy
Hertzfeld’s Switcher program accomplished in 1985. Switcher sliced up your

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

Figure 1-2.

Macintosh system software

Item

Location

Comments

Operating System

ROM

Includes File Manager, Memory
Manager, some device drivers, etc.

User Interface Toolbox

ROM

Includes QuickDraw, Window
Manager, Menu Manager, Control
Manager, etc.

ROM patches

System file

Used to fix ROM bugs and add
features

Desk accessories, fonts,
more device drivers

System file
and other files

Stored as resources

Finder

Finder file

Contains the Finder program

Printing software

StyleWriter,

“Chooser” desk accessory picks

ImageWriter,

desired printer

LaserWriter files

Macintosh into several smaller pieces, and each piece could hold one application.

Only one could have the screen at any time, but you could switch among loaded
applications with a click.

Adding this kind of functionality and making it work with existing software
was something like lifting up a skyscraper to rebuild the foundation. Hertzfeld,

who had written much of the Macintosh’s ROM, called it “application developer’s
revenge’ against him for sins he committed in the ROM because he had to make it

work with existing programs.
In 1987, Apple released MultiFinder, a more amibitious product which not only

allowed multiple applications at the same time, but let them all share the screen.
Hertzfeld was working on a project called Servant which would do that, too, plus
allow users to modify resources easily, but he announced that he would rebuild
Servant to use Apple’s multiapplication system, since it would be the “ official” way

of doing things.
From the first release of MultiFinder in 1987, a work of crazed genius produced

by Phil Goldman and Erich Ringewald, until the appearance of Macintosh System
7 in 1991, Apple moved to integrate MultiFinder’s features into the operating

system. With the release of System 7, the features of MultiFinder were officially

relocated to a new part of the system called the Process Manager, and the name
MultiFinder was officially dropped.

One of the most remarkable things about Apple’s MultiFinder/Process Manager multitasking stuff is that it didn’t change the rules of Macintosh programming

very much at all. Most Macintosh programs written before MultiFinder existed
continued to work fine after it arrived. Apple system software programmers work
very, very hard to minimize the disruption caused by new software, but they can’t

eliminate it completely if they want to make any progress at all.

Chapter1

Getting Started

Everything you know is wrong
Is everything you know really wrong? No, it just seems that way sometimes when

you're programming a Macintosh, especially when you're getting started. This
uncomfortable feeling, common to new Macintosh programmers, arises from a
sense of disorientation when you begin to write Macintosh software.

The first symptom of “Macintosh Malaise” usually comes about when you

attempt to write your first program. Most folks start with a short, simple program
that says “Hello, world” on the screen, or prints the integers from one to ten, or
something easy like that. To accomplish this task for the first time on a Macintosh,
you have to face a number of unexpected hurdles. See if any or all of these are

familiar to you:
1.

Understanding what a resource file is and how to create one with the right

2.

Learning which Init calls to put in your program and in what order.

3.

Figuring out how to put text on the screen of a computer that appears to have
no text mode.

4.

Making sure that your program, once created on the disk, is known by the

things in it.

Finder to be an application, so that you can run it.

5.

Figuring out how to get all those great graphics printed out.

These steps are necessary in addition to the usual ones you need to figure out
how to use a new development environment. It's easy to see why the Macintosh
acquired the reputation of a machine that’s hard to program (and we haven't even
gotten to the hard stuff yet!).
Some of the more Macintosh-like development systems insulate you froma lot
of the shock of your first leap into the Macintosh development world. There are

several systems that actually let you get a simple program running without having
to deal with a lot of extraneous hassle. However, to finish building an application
will still require that you jump over the hurdles listed.
Is the Macintosh really hard to program? It’s true that there’s a lot for the
programmer to learn. You may remember the original Macintosh commercials, in

whicha large instruction manual was dropped on a desk next to a computer made
by you-know-who, causing the table to shake, while the Macintosh’s tiny owner's

guide (which most users never need and keep perpetually shrink-wrapped) flutters down next to the Macintosh. You might think of Inside Macintosh, Apple's
comprehensive technical reference, as the table-shaker for Macintosh.
Is this deceptive on Apple’s part? Not at all. The Macintosh system hides
complexity from the user, but builds in enough power for developers to create pro-

grams like 4th Dimension and Excel. Thanks to this hiding of complexity, Macintosh
quickly established its initial goal of being perceived as an easy-to-learn computer.

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

Yes, but is the Macintosh hard to program? In 1983, when the first Macintosh

developers began, the answer was an unqualified yes. The development tools were

few and fairly crude, the documentation was incomplete, and the sum of experience in Macintosh application development was zero.
Today, the situation is astonishingly different. There are now over fifty different development environments, representing at least a dozen different lan-

guages, including C + + , Object Pascal, C, Pascal, assembler,BASIC, Lisp, Modula-2,
Fortran, Prolog, Smalltalk, Forth, and COBOL (yes, COBOL), there are disk patch

tools, disassemblers, debuggers, memory-display utilities, and more; there is a
complete technical manual called Inside Macintosh; there are powerful object programming tools and libraries, including the incredible MacApp system from Apple;
but maybe most important, there is the sum of close to ten years of experience in
application software development for the Macintosh—thousands of applications.
Obviously, we can’t all learn about every technique used by developers over
the years, but we do know enough to be light-years ahead of where we were when
the Macintosh was introduced. We know what different kinds of user interfaces
look like; we know about several efficient memory management techniques; we

know a

lot about debugging. Much of this book is devoted to presenting this

accumulated knowledge.

By now, you've probably figured out that I’m not going to give a straight
answer to the question of whether Macintosh is hard to program (author’s prerog-

ative). Let’s just say that there’s more to learn, and more power to be exploited, than
on a conventional system. The same amount of effort, applied in the right way to

Macintosh development, can produce a result that is both easier for a user to learn

and more powerful than an application program on a conventional system.
Think of it this way: imagine that you’re in San Jose and that you have an hour

to travel. You have a choice: you can spend the hour in your car, driving up the
peninsula to San Francisco, or you can spend the hour flying in a jet plane, arriving
in Los Angeles at the end of the hour (see Figure 1-3). Both are ways to travel; both

trips take an hour. By using the airplane, you have a journey that is technologically

more difficult, and perhaps riskier, but you get to go farther.
Writing software is the same way. Macintosh development can be tricky, but in

the end you will have gone farther. You'll also have a lot more fun getting there,
even if you like San Francisco better than Los Angeles.

Something that can make any task, especially writing software, seem impossi-

ble is blind ignorance and lack of information. Unfortunately, there’s so much to
learn in writing Macintosh software that ignorance often gets the upper hand. The

only way to really solve programming problems is to understand precisely what is
going wrong and why. When your Macintosh crashes, it hasn’t randomly decided

that it wants you to go to lunch—it’s actually providing some clues about what
went wrong.

And that’s what this book is all about—to tell you what's happening when your
application crashes, to teach you how to use lots of Toolbox tricks, and to give you

Chapter1

Getting Started

] hour by car

San Francisco
San Jose

] hour by plane

Los Angeles

Figure 1-3.

Flying versus driving

good, solid information about what's going on inside the Macintosh when your
application is running. This book is intended to enlighten you and demystify
Macintosh programming for you.

How to get there from here
Since the Macintosh Operating System and the Toolbox are bothin ROM, and since

all programs have to call on the OS and Toolbox to get things done, there must be
some kind of communication set up between the programming language you're
using and the ROM.

The ROM contains hundreds of individually callable routines. Each requires
certain parameters to be passed to it and then uses these parameters to perform
some action. Some routines also return values to you when you call them.
High-level languages learn how to call the ROM through the use of chunks of

code called libraries. These libraries are programs, usually supplied on disk with
language products, that define for you some or all of the Macintosh ROM calls so
that your program can use them.
For example, when you use a Macintosh C compiler, you might write a statement like this:
InitFonts

();

When the compiler, which translates your source code into machine language,
comes to this statement, how does it know what to do? It doesn’t have statements like

10

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

InitFonts built into it—that would make it huge and inflexible. Instead, you've prob-

ably got a statement at the beginning of your program that looks something like this:
#include

fonts.h

This means that there’s a file on the disk called fonts.h, which has been previously created, that contains definitions for the compiler; in this case, it defines calls
to the Font Manager in the Macintosh ROM, including InitFonts. So, when the

compiler reaches the InitFonts line, it determines what to do by looking in the file

called fonts.h, which you've told it about in your “include” statement.
In the Macintosh ROM, commands like Initfonts are encoded as a

single

instruction to the MC68000-series microprocessor that runs the Macintosh. Some-

times this instruction is produced by the compiler; sometimes it’s created by the
linker, if your system uses a linker. Whether the compiler or linker actually generates this ROM call instruction depends on which development system you’re using
and which ROM call was made.
The single-instruction machine language encoding produces several benefits:
1.

The ROM routines are not required to stay fixed in a certain location from one

ROM version to another, as they were, for example, with the original Apple II
ROM.
2.

The names of the ROM routines are not present in the ROM itself; they’re

known by number, and the high-level language assigns the name.
3.

Calls to the ROM routines are simply a special 68000 instruction which takes up

just 2 bytes.
Although much of the Macintosh ROM (especially the Toolbox) was originally
written with Pascal callers in mind, virtually any language can be adapted to call

the ROM. The most popular languages for Macintosh programming are C, Pascal,
and assembler, but all the languages available for the Macintosh provide some
access to the ROM calls. For more on how ROM calls work, see the Chapter 10
section entitled How ROM Calls Work (appropriately enough).

Resources
Once you've compiled and linked your program, you'll probably have another
development step that isn’t required on other systems. This step involves the
creation of your program’s resources.
To implement the user interface, the Macintosh uses lots of little pieces of data

and code: a list of words in a menu, the dimensions of a window, the code that

draws a scroll bar, the bits that constitute an icon. These pieces, and many others,
are known as resources. Resources are so common and important in the Macintosh
system that many people find it difficult to define them concisely. If you ask a

Chapter1

Getting Started

Macintosh programmer what a resource is, you're likely to be told, “Everything is
a resource!’ That's close, but we'll try to be a little more definitive.
Every Macintosh disk file has two parts, a data fork and a resource fork. The

data fork is a conventional disk file; it consists of a stream of bytes that is interpreted
by the program that created it. The resource fork is also a stream of bytes, butit’s got

a sort of index, called the resource map, that allows the system to see it as a
sequence of separate, discrete things: resources. The part of the Macintosh ROM
called the Resource Manager understands this map and provides access to the
resources in the file by name and number.
Every resource has a kind, called its type, and a number, its ID, that the
Resource Manager can use to get it. For example, if a program wants to display an
icon that it has stored in a resource file, it does not have to know specifically where

in the file the icon is stored; by knowing its type, which will probably be ICON, and
its ID number, the program can ask the Resource Manager to get the icon.

Several nice advantages come along with the use of resources. Since just about

all the standard data types used by the system are defined as resource types, you
rarely have to know their format in order to use them. Another idea behind the

creation of the Resource Manager is that it allows a program’s logic to be separated
from its data to a very high degree. This makes it a lot easier to translate an
application to another (human) language. For example, most applications have all
their text—the words that show up in menus, dialogs, and windows—stored as
resources. This means that a person who is not a programmer can use a resource

editing tool to translate the text to the new language—no recompiling (or source
code) is needed. The same person can continue using the resource editor to resize

windows and dialog boxes as necessary to accommodate the new text, which may

be shorter or longer.

Why a fork? Many Macintosh applications put their information in

resource forks. You'll find very few files that have more informationin the

data fork thanin the resource fork. If this is thecase, why does the data fork

exist at all? Why doesn’t the Macintosh simplysupport resource forks?The
main reason is that resources require some overhead to decode resource
maps, which translates into slower disk access. So the data forkis provided as
a way of storing raw data that the program interprets directly.

Another interesting feature of the Resource Manager is that it provides a

degree of virtual memory. A single Resource Manager call, GetResource, will first

check to see if the desired resource is already in memory. If so, the call returns,
simply telling the caller where in memory to find the resource; if not, the Resource
Manager tries to load the resource from disk. If necessary, previously loaded

resources can be unloaded from memory, making room for the new one. This

11

12

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

means that simply using the GetResource call will automatically take advantage of
larger-memory systems without changing any of your code.

Building our application
Let's say we’ve completed compiling and linking our application, and we've just
figured out that we need to create a resource file as output. Now that we’ve

discussed what resources are and how they fit into a resource file, it’s time to figure
out the relationship between a resource file and an application program on disk.
Actually, that relationship is very simple: an application is a Macintosh file, and
every Macintosh file has a resource fork and a data fork (as we just discussed). What
goes where, and how does it get there?
The real meat of the application, the compiled code that you've carefully
crafted, goes into the resource fork. It consists of resources of type CODE (case is
significant in resource types; it’s CODE, not code or Code). These CODE resources
are generated automatically by most development systems. For example, in MPW
Pascal, you can use the $5 compiler directive to split your program up into separately loadable segments. When you pass the program through the compiler and
linker, you'll get one CODE resource for each segment that you declared in your
program.

No matter how it was created, every application has at least two CODE
resources in its resource fork. One of them, the CODE resource with ID 1, is a
special segment called the main segment. This segment is loaded when the application starts up and stays put until the application quits. It’s used as a sort of anchor

for the rest of the application’s resources, which can be loaded, moved, unloaded,
and reloaded as the application runs. Most development systems create CODE 1

out of whatever part of your application hasn’t been directed into a specific segment. If you specify no segmentation at all, your whole program will become
CODE 1. That's all right for small applications, but you'll have to segment to get the

best use of the Macintosh’s memory for most applications.
The other required, special CODE resource has an ID of 0. This resource actu-

ally isn’t part of your program at all, but is a special table of information that is
loaded into memory when your application is started. It includes information like
the amount of memory that all your global variables require. We'll discuss this
resource later.

These two special resources (CODE 0 and CODE 1), as well as other CODE

resources, are usually generated automatically from your source code by whatever
development system you’re using, so you normally won't have to worry about
creating them yourself. Again, most development systems use some sort of segmentation command (like $5 in MPW Pascal) to tell the compiler to start making a
new, separately loadable CODE resource.

An application must contain at least a CODE 0 and a CODE1 or it will generate
an error when it’s started, but most applications have a lot more resources. Most

Chapter1

applications have menus and store them in MENU

Getting Started

resources; most have windows

whose layout is kept in WIND resources; most have dialogs and keep the dialog
information ina DLOG resource, with the dialog’s item list (the things displayed in
the dialog) kept in a DITL; and most have many more resources. The Finder, for
example, has 17 different resource types and more than 80 different resources;

HyperCard has 24 different types and over 250 different resources! How are these
resources created?
There are two fundamental types of resource creation tools: resource compilers and resource editors. Resource compilers generally work the way other compilers do: they take a textual, symbolic representation and producea translated,
machine-usable output file. In Figure 1-4 you'll see a sample section of input to the
resource compiler that’s supplied with Apple’s Macintosh Programmer's Workshop. This fragment describes a dialog item list (type DITL).

resource ‘DITL’ (1000,purgeable) {

|

{50,30,70,110},

Button
{

enabled,

Yes

.

},

|

{85,170,105,250},|
Button {
O
enabled,
Cancel
}y
{13,57,33,220},
StaticText {
disabled,

|

|

Do you really want to?

Figure 1-4.

Resource compiler input

13

14

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

Resource compilers have one major drawback: they’re textual representations
of mostly graphical objects. Why should items be positioned by specifying coordinates? Why shouldn’t we be able to see the dialog on the screen as it will appear and
drag the items around with the mouse to their proper places?
These questions become even more acute when you consider that one of the

promises of resources was that the separation of code from data would allow a
nontechnical person to translate software from one language to another. A translator who has to use a resource compiler must learn a significant amount about the
Macintosh and its resources. If, on the other hand, a graphically oriented resource

editor were used, the translator could get along with a lot less mucking around in
the system’s internal details. Instead, the translator could enlarge a window by dragging its size box or translate a button’s text by clicking on the button and typing.
The concept of a resource editor was developed early in the Macintosh’s life,

but creating the program itself proved to be an unimagined challenge. A resource
editor is a metatool, since it must run in a system that is composed mostly of
resources. Apple offers a resource editor, named ResEdit, that allows you to create
and modify resources that your application will use. In Figure 1-5 you can see the

dialog as it will appear in real life. You move items by dragging them. You change
text by clicking on it and then typing. What a concept!
There is one nice advantage to resource compilers. They allow you to specify a

textual, human-readable, printable source file that can be used to re-create the
resource file at any time. If you use a resource editor to create your resources, the
only form you get is the object code—the resource file itself. If you ever lose your
only copy, there’s no automated way to rebuild.
Fortunately, this problem is solved by a tool called a resource decompiler. This
program can take a resource file as input and produce a text representation as

output. This text representation can be printed out, put in a binder alongside your

program source code, and stored in a fireproof safe to save you from disaster. As a

final touch, the resource compiler can recompile the source listing and produce a
resource file. Apple provides a resource compiler and decompiler (called Rez and
DeRez) as a part of the Macintosh Programmer's Workshop.
So a good technique for creating a resource file is this:
1.

Use the resource editor to create your MENUs, WINDs, DLOGs, and so on.

Use the decompiler to produce a text source.
3.

Asdevelopment progresses, use the resource editor to make changes and then

the decompiler to make a source listing; or use a text editor to modify the source

listing and use the resource compiler to produce a resource file. Figure 1-6
shows this process.
With this array of resource editing tools at your fingertips, you're way ahead of
early Macintosh developers, who had nothing but a resource compiler to help their
resource creativity. Three cheers for progress!

Chapter 1

Getting Started

” @ File Edit Resource Window DITL Alignment

@ %

= 128 from test

wl [oll
Color:

@ Default

© Custom

niti

in-

[yonn
|

ITL 1D = 1000 from test

: [40__|

Top: | 40

3

Height: | 140

Do

Left:[40 | Width: [280

4

you really

4

BJ Check Box
@) Radio Button

(] Control

want to?

T: Static Text
Edit Text

\_ Picture
User Item

Figure 1-5.

Resource editor editing dialog item list

is —»+| |— =e
ResEdit

resource file

Resource

Resource

editor

DeRez
Resource

file

text file

decompiler

Resource

definitions

or

sb
—|

text file

Edit

text file

Resource
definitions

Text
editor

Resource
definitions

(from DeRez)
Figure 1-6.

Resource file development

resource file

Resource
compiler

Resource
file

16

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

Other kinds of programs
Applications are the programs most people write most of the time, but there are

other kinds of programs running around inside a Macintosh. Like most other
computers, the Macintosh uses device drivers, programs that understand how to
talk to various built-in or plugged-in devices like disk drives, modems, and digitizers. But the Macintosh system also uses many other kinds of programs to do
various tasks.

One special kind of Macintosh program is the desk accessory. Originally, desk
accessories were designed as over-ambitious drivers that had user interfaces and

performed decidedly nondriver functions, like calculators and clocks. Desk accessories were a way to let users run more than one thing at once, even though all the

things but one were not full-fledged applications.
As the system has evolved, the nature and role of desk accessories has changed.
With System 7’s multitasking, many applications can live at once, so desk accessories are no big deal in that regard. Under System 7, desk accessories, like Chip in

“Beauty and the Beast,” no longer have to sleep in the System file—they’re separate, double-clickable files, just like applications.
Another, less visible kind of program is the definition function. A definition

function is a program that describes the behavior and appearance of a menu,
control, or window. For example, the standard menu definition function draws
menus that have one line of text per item, with options such as a check mark to the

left of the item, various text styles such as bold and italic, command key equivalents
to the right of the item, and more. The Toolbox allows you to write your own

definition functions to customize the appearance of menus, controls, and windows
while still taking advantage of the Toolbox structures. Again, the format of these

functions is strictly defined.
There are additional pieces of system software called packages, which didn’t fit
into the ROM; for example, the Disk Initialization Package. These packages also

consist of programs in a carefully defined format.
As you may have guessed, all these “alternative” kinds of programs are stored
as resources. Device drivers and desk accessories are DRVR resources; menu, con-

trol, and window definition functions are MDEF, CDEF, and WDEF resources;
packages are resources of type PACK. There are other kinds of resources that
contain code; these are just a few.

If you want to write one of these special kinds of resources, you have to know

how to generate the special formats required. Sometimes the way to do that isn’t
obvious, especially with high-level languages. One of the topics we'll play with in
Chapter 9 is the creation of some of these kinds of resources with high-level languages.

Chapter1

Getting Started

Power tools
Now that we've discussed the fundamentals of what tools are needed to do which
jobs in Macintosh software development, let’s take a brief look at some of the

specific development systems and utilities that are available.

Inside Macintosh
Apple's comprehensive technical reference for Macintosh programmers is called

Inside Macintosh. This manual comes in six volumes, one for each of the Star Trek
movies. Volumes 1 through 3 provide the documentation for the original 64K ROM

and system software; volume 4 gives the additional information for the 128K ver-

sion of the ROM, which is mainly the hierarchical file system; volume 5 adds the
new stuff for the 256K ROM, primarily color goodies and slots; volume 6 is filled

with details about new System 7 features. The whole set is published by AddisonWesley.
Volumes in the Inside Macintosh set do not replace previous books; they provide
changes and supplemental information. This makes them hard to use sometimes.

To remedy this situation, Apple has created compact disc-based versions of the
material that makes searching easier. Also in the works is a total reconstruction of
the paper version into a new edition.

You just can’t attempt serious Macintosh programming without Inside Macintosh. Although there are lots of other books that tell you about programming the

Macintosh (like the one you're reading), none of them attempts to replace the

encyclopedic completeness of Inside Macintosh.

Macintosh technical notes
Books like Inside Macintosh take a long time to create and revise, but Macintosh
system software is constantly evolving. Apple provides Macintosh technical notes
as a way of getting out technical information fast. Technical notes act as a sort of
supplement to Inside Macintosh, offering examples, documenting bugs, and presenting new information. A new set of notes is published every two months.

develop magazine
Four times a year,Apple publishes a technical journal called develop. This magazine
includes sample programs, informational articles, news of useful tools, and general

good stuff for developers. Not insignificantly, develop is edited by Caroline Rose,
who wrote and edited most of the first three volumes of Inside Macintosh.

17

18

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

Macintosh Programmer’s Workshop
The reference standard for Macintosh software development (that means it’s the
one that everything else gets compared to) is the Macintosh Programmer’s Workshop (MPW), produced by Apple. MPW got a fairly late start as a Macintosh development environment, but because of its power and the fact that it has Apple’s
name, it has become very popular. MPW is used by Apple itself for most of its
software development.
The heart of MPW is an application called MPW Shell, which is both a text

editor and an environment for interpreting commands. After you start MPW Shell,
you can open old text files or create new ones, each getting its own window in the
familiar style. Since MPW Shell is a command interpreter, you can also type in
many commands for file handling (Open, Newfolder, Delete, Duplicate, Move),
editing (Adjust, Align, Count), and other functions (Compare, AddMenu, Files,

StackWindows, and many others). The command language gives you the ability to
string together a set of commands that you'll repeat a lot and save them ina file,

then execute them just by typing the name of the file they’re in.

MPW Shell also lets you run specially written programs called tools, which
include compilers, a linker, an assembler, and lots of other utilities (you can also
write your own). All these tools run without having to leave the shell.
Apple sells C and Pascal compilers that work with MPW. Each compiler comes

witha set of libraries and definition files for the Macintosh system calls. Of course,
since they come from Apple, these are the definitive versions, always striving to

match Inside Macintosh exactly. One advantage to MPW is that it usually contains

libraries for the latest ROMs and system software (but not always).
MPW will probably look familiar if you’ve used powerful development systems on other computers, and it may appear completely alien if you've never used
any computer other than a Macintosh. This is because MPW blends the conven-

tional, command-line style of traditional development systems with many of the
trappings of the Macintosh interface.

The best example of this merger is a tool that can be used to provide a
Macintosh-like dialog, with buttons, check boxes, file lists and all, for even the most
convoluted MPW tools. This tool, called Commando for obscure and possibly
clever reasons, greatly humanizes MPW for a new user, or even an old user who

doesn't want to memorize lots of command-line options. Figure 1-7 gives an example of a dialog built with Commando (it’s for the C compiler). In addition to Commando, MPW hasa good help facility that will remind you about a command and
its parameters.

MPW comes with MPW Shell, a linker, assembler, resource compiler, resource

decompiler, debugger, resource editor, source code control system, and many
miscellaneous tools. The C and Pascal compilers are sold separately (not recom-

mended for children under 7).

Chapter1

-C Options

.

[Source File(s)... |

~QOutput Redirection

Cutput

[More Options... |
| Search Paths... |

Object fite
£8

i

|
| Define

|

error

| |

--Preprocessor

af

Getting Started

_

Undefine

_

rt

rr

-Command Line
c

—Help

C -- Apple C compiler. Produce standard object file from a TEXT type file.
a

Figure 1-7.

|

Cancel

)

3.2

Commando dialog

MacApp
MacApp is a set of libraries that implement a generic Macintosh application that

already performs most of the standard user-interface tasks, like creating multiple,
selectable, draggable windows with scroll bars, providing pull-down menus, printing, and so on. The idea of MacApp is that a programmer shouldn’t have to reimplement this kind of standard behavior for every new application. Instead, the

programmer just implements the part of an application that’s not part of the common user interface; for example, drawing a picture in a window, sending informa-

tion to the modem, or recalculating a spreadsheet.
Object-oriented programming turns out to be a good match for the way Macintosh programs are structured, and MacApp is a thorough and well-documented im-

plementation. MacApp works under MPW, and you can program in Pascal or

C++.

Third-party tools and languages
One of Apple’s wisest strategic decisions about Macintosh was to encourage thirdparty (that is, non-Apple) development of software and hardware add-ons. There
has always been a sizable program at Apple that provides help to developers.

A pleasant result of this program is that many companies have created
Macintosh-based development systems. As we said earlier, there are now over fifty
different development systems available for Macintosh. Included in this list are
some powerful and innovative tools. The most popular is probably THINK C from

Symantec, which is used to create many commercial applications. THINK C and its
companion, THINK

Pascal, offer amazingly fast compilation time, source-level

debugging, and object-oriented extensions.

19

20

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

On-line services
Bulletin boards and on-line services are great places to find an answer to a technical

question. Probably the best-known and busiest service is the Apple Developer's
Forum on CompuServe. Thisis a place where lots of amateur and professional
programmers get together to talk to each other electronically. Reading the public
messages is a great way to learn new things. You can also find out lots of cool stuff from
the developer forum on another service, America Online. Also, if you have access to

UseNet, you can find massive programming discussions there.

Apple Programmers and Developers Association
To help distribute all the programmer tools and documentation, Apple runs the
Apple Programmers and Developers Association (known as APDA). This group
publishes a catalog that includes MPW, Inside Macintosh, third-party products, and
lots of other goodies for Macintosh programmers. Through APDA, Apple provides
prerelease software and draft manuals for important new development products.
To order products from APDA, you can call 800-282-2732.

Where to get this stuff
The third-party products listed in this section are available through enlightened
retailers and mail-order dealers. If you can’t find something you want, just call the
manufacturer. Inside Macintosh is available in many book stores, and it can be

ordered from Addison-Wesley if you can’t find it. MPW, MacApp, and Macintosh
technical notes are available from APDA.

Things to remember

¢ Macintosh programminginvolves learning new ways of doing things,
since the Macintosh user-interface concepts are so different from thosein
conventional computers.

e Much of the Macintosh’s personalityis; defined by its ROM, which contains
the Operating System and the User Interface Toolbox.

_.® Resources are entities that can be referred to by type and ID, in memory or
in files. Many pieces of Macintosh dataare resources.

e Every Macintosh application must have:at least CODE resources 0 and 1.

e There are dozens of languages and.tools available for writing Macintosh

a software.

|

ee

C

H

A

P

T

E

R

2

Things in Memory
In this chapter we'll discuss things that live in the Macintosh’s memory and how

they behave. If you’re new to Macintosh programming, this information will help
you get off on the right foot. If you’ve been programming the Macintosh fora while,

you may find that you know some of this stuff, but not all of it, and the new
information will be very useful for you, too.

Fables
In Chapter 1 we talked about the funny feeling you get when you realize that, from
a programmer’s point of view, just about everything on a Macintosh seems to be

unlike other computers. As you progress, you begin to discover how to get things
done, but you may not truly learn how and why certain things happen on a

Macintosh. Eventually, this gap of knowledge rises up like a monster and bites you
on the nose, stopping a project cold for hours or even days until you figure out
what's going on.

These knowledge gaps have led to the existence of several popular Macintosh
Programming Fables, which are stories handed down from generation to generation of Macintosh programmers, and which have in common the fact that they're
absolutely false and will eventually mess up the unsuspecting programmer. One of
the jobs of this book is to expose these fables.
The most popular Macintosh Programming Fable is undoubtedly the Story of
the RAM That Ran Away. The story says that the Memory Manager in the Macintosh’s operating system is always moving things around, like an insane electronic
version of musical chairs, and that as soon as you put something somewhere in

21

22

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

Macintosh RAM, it’s not there any more. This means that you'd better take extraordinary measures to keep track of your variables, and that anything that goes wrong

with your program can be blamed on something that simply “floated away” from
where it belongs.

Well, it just ain’t so. As with all fables, this one is based on a grain of truth and
then blown completely out of proportion. The grain of truth is that the Macintosh’s
Memory Manager supports relocatable blocks, which are objects in memory that

can move around at certain well-defined times. Unfortunately, the “well-defined”
part is usually forgotten, and so a fable is born. In this chapter we'll discuss exactly
what kinds of things can move in memory, exactly when they can and cannot

move, and how to live with all of it.
The second most popular fable is the Tale of the Macintosh That Went to
Lunch. This one says that when your program makes your Macintosh put up a

system error box, or when it does something even weirder, like flashing the screen,
making machine-gun sounds, or even rebooting the system, your program has

gone haywire, the Macintosh went nuts, it all just sort of happened at random, and
you'll never, ever find out what happened. Not true! All these happenings are

distinct signals from your Macintosh as it cries out for help.
In this chapter and others we'll discuss exactly what’s going on when these
things happen and what you can do about them.

That amazing moving memory
Everybody loves memory maps, especially old-timers. Just show ‘em a memory
map and they'll figure out the rest. If you like memory maps, you'll be glad to know

that we've got one to help you through this discussion. The memory map, which
you can see in Figure 2-1, is incredibly oversimplified, but it’s a good starting point.

It divides the Macintosh’s RAM into five main sections:
System globals
Screen buffer
System heap
Application heap

Stack
The lowest part of memory, starting at location 0, belongs to the system. This.
area, called the system globals, is filled with variables that are used by various parts
of the system, and you can sometimes use them too. The kinds of things that are
stored in this part of memory are the pattern with which the desktop is painted
(called DeskPattern), the menu ID of the currently highlighted menu (TheMenu),

and the name of the current application (CurApName). The information kept in

the system globals area is vital, and virtually all applications will have to use it at

Chapter2

Things in Memory

Screen buffer

Stack

Application heap

System heap

System globals

Figure 2-1.

Macintosh memory map

some point. A lot of the information that’s found in this area is available in other
ways, such as through ROM calls. If there’s a higher-level way to get information
that’s in the system globals area, use it. As Apple evolves the operating system, it
gets harder and harder to maintain compatibility with programs that tickle low
memory locations, but ROM calls stay pretty stable.

Elsewhere memory is the RAM that’s mapped to the screen. Most applications
never deal directly with this part of memory. In general, they draw on the screen by
using QuickDraw calls.
The next important section of RAM is the system heap, which contains objects
that are used mainly by the Operating System. Unlike the system globals area,

which contains mostly small variables used by the Toolbox and Operating System,
the system heap contains larger data structures, such as information about open
files. System heap structures are allocated dynamically as things happen in the

23

24

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

system; for example, the system heap contains a data structure called a Volume
Control Block (VCB) for every disk volume that’s currently mounted by the system.
If you insert a new disk, a new VCB is allocated in the system heap and filled in by
the operating system.

Another difference between the system globals area and the system heap is
that your application will rarely, if ever, get any information directly from the

system heap.

|

The last two pieces of RAM are called the application heap and the stack. These
are the areas that are mostly reserved for use by your application. You'll notice that

the vast majority of RAM is dedicated to this purpose, so your programs get to use
most of the computer's RAM.

Our memory map in Figure 2-1 gives no addresses for a couple of good reasons:
first, the addresses tend to change as the Macintosh hardware and system software

evolve, and second, you usually don’t have to care where these things are, since
you program at a higher level.
In case you do need to find these areas in memory—such as when you’re

debugging—there are system globals to help you out. The system heap starts at the
location pointed to by SysZone, and the application heap starts at ApplZone. The
scrnBase global points to the start of the screen buffer. See Appendix D for other
fun globals you can look at.

MultiFinder/Process Manager
If you're using MultiFinder or System 7, some parts of the memory map are different. There are still a system globals area and a system heap at the bottom of
memory, and a video buffer somewhere. However, each application needs to keep

track of its own world, which includes its application heap, its stack, and some
system globals.

When an application is launched, a new application heap and stack are created
from available RAM. Instead of using all the available space from the system heap
on up, the newborn application gets a chunk of space whose size is dictated by a
resource (type SIZE, ID —1)inits resource file. When the user tries to launch another

application, it will also get its own heap and stack if there’s enough RAM left.
Since every application has its own complete application heap and stack, the
system can just switch between these application worlds when the user moves

from one application to another. But what about the system globals? Some of the
system globals have to be different for each application; for example, the global
MenuList contains a handle to the application’s current menu bar; obviously, every

application that’s running has to have its own copy of this global.
To accommodate these globals, the system creates a separate copy of them for

each active application. When the user switches from one application to another, the
right set of globals is swapped in along with the heap and stack. Also, the system is
smart enough to know which globals should be swapped and which can be left alone.

Chapter2

Things in Memory

The stack usually holds static variables. For example, when you declare a

variable in Pascal like this:
VAR myResult

:

CHAR;

or like this in a C program:
char myResult;

your variable myResult will be stored on the stack. Most languages allocate space

for stack variables in the order that they’re encountered. Global variables stick

around for the duration of the program. Variables that are local to a procedure or
function are placed on the stack when the function starts, manipulated while the
function is running, then thrown away by cutting back (shrinking) the stack when
the function ends.
The final area of memory shown in Figure 2-1 is the application heap. This
chunk of memory holds virtually everything used by your application except its
variables, which are kept on the stack, as noted previously. Among the things kept
in the application heap are all your application’s resources as they're loaded into
memory. Remember that an application’s resources include things like MENUs,

DLOGs, ICONs, and even the application’s code itself (resources of type CODE).
Along with resources, the application heap holds all the objects that you create

in your application when you call NewHandle or NewPtr to request memory from
the Memory Manager. In fact, that’s why you'll find your resources in the applica-

tion heap: before a resource is loaded into memory, the Resource Manager gets a
chunk of memory for it by calling

NewHandle. Lots of ROM routines call NewHan-

dle or NewPtr to get space for things in the heap, and objects created with

NewHandle or NewPtr are always located in the heap.

Different heaps. Some resources getloaded into the system heap, and
sometimes NewHandle and NewPtr areused to reserve memory in the sys-

tem heap. In the case of the Memory Manager calls, there’s a special flavor of

NewHandle and NewPtr that causes the new block to be allocated in the

system heap. In addition, resources havean attribute you can set that causes

them to be loaded into the system heap. instead of the application. heap.

Putting thingsin the system heapis a way to keep them around between

applications, since both the stack and the application heap’s contents are
reinitialized when a new application starts up. You can learn more about this

subjectin the Keeping Things Around between Applications section of Chapter 10.

:

29

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

Allocating memory
As your program runs and as new things are allocated in memory, the stack and the

application heap expand, as suggested by the ominous-looking arrows in Figure
2-1. We've learned that the application heap holds blocks that are created with the
Memory Manager calls

NewHandle and NewPtr, while the stack holds a program’s

declared variables. How do the stack and heap allocation processes work?
First, it’s important to realize the fundamental differences in creating new
items in the stack and the application heap. When a new stack object is created,

usually with a variable declaration in a high-level language (as noted previously),

the space for the item is placed on the top of the stack. As new things are added, the
size of the stack simply increases by the size of the new item. When another new
item is added, it’s added to the new top of the stack. The system maintains a pointer

to the top of the stack called, cleverly enough, the stack pointer.
When an item is removed from the stack, the size of the stack is reduced and the
stack pointer is adjusted to point to the top of the new, smaller stack. This kind of
operation is called a last in, first out or LIFO stack; in other words, the last thing

“in” (added to the stack) will be the first thing “out” (removed from the stack). This
operation is pictured in Figure 2-2.

Stack

Stack

pointer

|

Initial

stack
Figure 2-2.

Stack

pointer

|

pointer

New object

added

How a LIFO stack works

New object

added

Stack

pointer

Object

removed

Chapter2

Feeling gravity’s pull.

Things in Memory

Most computer books that show youa picture of a

stack (including this one and Inside Macintosh) show the top of stack at the
bottom of the picture. Is this done just to confuse you? Yes. No, just kidding.
Actually, stacks are normally pictured this way because on most computers,

the stack growsin memory from high to low addresses. So, the top of the stack

is actually the lowest address on the stack. The reason computerstacks usu-

ally go from high to low memory is obscure (which meansI don’ tknow and |

I couldn't find anyone else who knew, either).

;

This kind of operation tells us several things about using the stack. First, it’s

obvious that the stack is a good place for allocating a few things at a time, using
them for a while, then removing them all at once. In fact, that’s exactly what you do
in a high-level language when you call a procedure or function. When that func-

tion is called, it must allocate space for its local variables all at once; when it’s
finished, it must deallocate that space, again all at once.
High-level languages also use the stack as a place to pass parameters to routines. When you call a procedure or function, its parameters are pushed on the

stack and then the routine is called. The routine can then access the parameters by
looking back on the stack.

Heaps
Stacks and high-level languages were made for each other, and most procedure-

oriented languages use the Macintosh stack for variables and parameters, among
other things. This is a pretty conventional use of a stack in a personal computer.
On the Macintosh, however,you also need another kind of memory allocation.
Since you have an environment in which little pieces of stuff (usually resources) are
constantly being loaded into memory, used, then tossed away, and since these little
pieces, unlike local variables, don’t necessarily correspond to a particular part of
the application and often have to be loaded one at a time, another way of doing
things is in order, and that’s where the idea of the heap comes along.
In a Macintosh heap, blocks are not necessarily allocated in a neat, linear
fashion as they are in the stack. Instead, the Memory Manager will attempt to put

a new block wherever it has room in the heap, following certain rules of preference
as to where the application would like the new block to go, but putting it elsewhere
if it has to.
This flexibility is why the heap is the place for resources, which load into
memory, and which then may go away and come back later. It’s also the place for
dynamically allocated data structures that belong to the application. For example,
if your application keeps a database of information and doesn’t know at run time
how many records it will need, it can allocate space for a new record in the heap

whenever necessary by making a NewHandle call.

27

28

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

Blocks in a heap may be scattered around, possibly with unused space between
two heap blocks. Each block, though, must consist of consecutive bytes. You can’t

have a single heap block that is in pieces; all of its bytes must be together.

Ie

Heaps in Pascal. If you’ve used Pascal compilers on other systems, especially UCSD Pascal, you may be familiar with the term heap as an area in
memory from which space can be dynamically allocated. However, the
Macintosh concept of a heap is only loosely based on this idea. To avoid

confusion, you should assume that a Macintosh heap behaves completely
differently from the “other” kind of heap. Also, a terminology reminder:
Macintosh heaps are also called heap zones. Heap = heap zone.

If we thinka

bit about the joba

heap has to do, we can come up with some more

requirements for its capabilities. For example, we've said that new blocks will be

loading into the heap all the time, and that old, unneeded ones may be removed if
their space is needed. Let’s say that we want to create three blocks in memory (by
calling NewHandle). We'll call them Alan, Bryan, and Cary (see Figure 2-3). Then

we'll throw away (by calling DisposHandle) Bryan when we're done with him, and

Part of heap

Part of heap

After allocating three blocks

After deallocating Bryan,
then allocating Donn

Figure 2-3.

Allocation of blocks

Chapter2

Things in Memory

allocate a new, fourth block, called Donn. We're left with a gap between Alan and
Cary, and if the new blockis larger than the gap, the Memory Manager would have
to putit after Cary, leaving an unused (and potentially unusable) space in the heap;
if we never request a space smaller than or equal to the size of the gap, that space
will be wasted.
If this process continues throughout the execution of the program, we could
wind up with free space in little chunks all over the heap. We could have 100K bytes
free, yet not be able to allocate a 10K-byte block if we didn’t have 10K of consecutive

bytes free (see Figure 2-4 for a look at this situation). How can we avoid this?
Well, since the Macintosh Memory Manager was designed for just such a
busy-memory system, in which new blocks are constantly being created and old ones
released, it includes the all-important capability of maintaining relocatable objects ina
heap zone, as we mentioned earlier in this chapter. When you request some memory with the

NewHandle call, the memory block that’s created for you in the

Heap
4

WA

RAV)
ey
fa

Oe

CWWYWG

a

SC
SVV7V—a—~ya

MW

WAS

Figure 2-4.

Noncontiguous free space

29

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

heap is relocatable. This allows the Memory Manager, at well-defined times (there's that
phrase again), to move the block from one location to another within the heap. This

means that we can revisit the poor, muddled heap last seen in Figure 2-4 and request
our 10K block again. But as we now know (Figure 2-5), the blocks are relocatable, so the
Memory Manager can put all the free space together, fulfilling our memory request.
Can you think of any obvious disadvantages of having relocatable blocks? Can

you say “dangling pointer’? Sure you can, and if you're gonna go sliding things
around in memory, you'd better have a pretty good way of keeping track of just

where everything is and, while you're at it, letting the application know, too.
The way the Macintosh Memory Manager keeps track of relocatable blocks is
by creating one special pointer to each block. This pointer never moves. It is called
the master pointer for that block. When the Memory Manager moves the block, it
changes the master pointer to indicate the block’s new position.
When you call NewHandle to request a new relocatable block, the Memory
Manager allocates the new block, sets up a master pointer for it, and then returns to

SXF Used
SN
SSS
ey
SSSsww7pA_“~PV~—~"

DDC—6—6.M~

CRW

YL

D—.YK

_

30

Ryn

A“
SSSssgQq

Figure 2-5.

Heap compacted

Chapter2

Things in Memory

31

you the address of the master pointer as NewHandle’s function result. This address
of the master pointer is called a handle. Since the Memory Manager will always
keep the master pointer valid, and since the master pointer never moves in memory, the handle always provides a valid way to access the contents of the block, so
no matter where it goes, there you are (see Figure 2-6, buckaroo).

Terminology corner. Talking about relocatable blocks, handles, and master
pointers can sometimes be difficult. Here’s a helpful definition for these
terms: the value of a handle is the address of a master pointer; the value of a
master pointer is the address of a relocatable block.

In a high-level language, you can use a handle to get to a block by doubledereferencing it. In Pascal, it looks like this:
MyHandle~~

In C, you could write this:
**MyHandle

Heap

Heap

Master

Master
pointer

Before
relocation
Figure 2-6.

pointer

After
relocation
Master pointer updating

_

(Master pointer

| never moves)

[aK

32

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

Translating from programming languages to English, these statements say that
MyHandle is “’a pointer to a pointer to some data,” but, truly, to appreciate what's

going on, be sure you remember that there’s
e

Ablock in the heap that can be relocated

e

Amaster pointer to that block, kept up to date by the Memory Manager

e

Ahandle (MyHandle) that points to that master pointer
Because MyHandle holds the address of the master pointer and the master

pointer is updated by the Memory Manager whenever it moves the block, MyHan-

dle is always good for finding the memory block. You can see an example of how
this works in Figure 2-7.

What's where? When you allocate a new relocatable heap block, you call
NewHandle, and NewHandle returns a handle as a function result. You

- usually wind up writing a line of codethat looks like this:
myHandle := NewHandle ( someSize);

Just like all blocks created with NewHandle, this block is allocated in the heap.

However,myHandle is a variable declared by the program, soit’s on the stack.
Can this be right? Sure. The variable myHandle is just a pointer to the block's
master pointer,remember. So, myHandle, a variable on the stack, contains the
address of a master pointer, whichis inthe heap; the master pointer contains

the address of the relocatable block wejust allocated. There’s a picture of this

relationshipin Figure 2-8.

Description

Contents

Heap block

starts at

Data

112830

Description
Heap block

starts at
66522

Contents
Block was moved

Data

'

Master pointer

Master pointer

Master pointer

at 52024

L.112830}

gt 52004

| 66522 | never moves, but its

Handle

|

Handle

| 52024

52024 |

Before relocation
Figure 2-7.

How handles work

value is changed by
Memory Manager

After relocation

|

Handle never
changes

Chapter2

Stack

Things in Memory

Heap

Relocatable
block

myHandle

A

Waster
pointer

Figure 2-8.

Handle on stack, block in heap

Not all the blocks allocated in heaps are relocatable. In fact, when you call
NewFtr, the block that’s created is nonrelocatable. These blocks are allocated and

then sit there without budging until the application ends or until the application
calls DisposPtr on them, whichever comes first. Since nonrelocatable blocks never
move, there’s no master pointer for the Memory Manager to update, and no han-

dle. When you create a new nonrelocatable block with NewPtr,you get a pointer to
the block that remains valid until you dispose of the block (if you ever do).

In general, nonrelocatable blocks are bad news and should be avoided for your
data structures. The season is that nonrelocatable blocks are deadly to a heap: they
can reduce your available heap space by driving a stake down the middle of your

precious free space. Remember that the Memory Manager can allocate a block only
with consecutive bytes. If the free space in the heap becomes fragmented, as it did
in Figure 2-4, you wind up with lots of free memory that’s virtually useless. So,
when you need to create a new block in the heap for a dynamic data structure, like
a database record, make it a relocatable block by calling NewHandle, and you'll

help to keep your heap nice and unfragmented.
For an in-depth discussion of using relocatable blocks with random-access file

I/O, see the Random Access File I/O section of Chapter 10.

Allocation algorithms.

The Memory Manager is actually pretty smart about

where it places newly allocated nonrelocatable blocks. It will try very hard to
put a new nonrelocatable as low in the heap as possible so as not to cause
fragmentation.

Heap allocation. Remember that a stack is a last in, first out or LIFO structure. You might say that a heap, which really doesn’t maintain any kind of
ordering of its objects, is a LIOF structure: last in, okay, fine.

34

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

Sometimes you'll need to guarantee that a block in memory doesn’t move over
some period of time. You want to be a good person and make it relocatable, but
during some critical portion of your program, for any of several reasons (which
we'll discuss later in this chapter), you have to be sure that the block stays put and
is not relocated. The Memory Manager provides the flexibility for doing this by
allowing you to temporarily lock a relocatable block. You can do this by calling the
Memory Manager function HLock. Locking a block prevents it from being relocated.
You don’t want to go around blindly locking blocks, though, since a locked
relocatable is just as immobile as a nonrelocatable. As soon as the block doesn’t have

to be locked down any longer, you should unlock it by calling HUnlock. This will
allow it to resume being relocatable, should the Memory Manager need to move it.

If you're going to keep the block locked for some time, you can call the Memory
Manager routine MoveHHi to get the block up and out of the way as much as

possible before locking it. If it won't be locked for very long, you don’t have to
bother with MoveHHi.

Purging
Many of the relocatable blocks in the heap are resources that have been loaded
from disk, so the Memory Manager employs another trick to maximize the use of
the space in the heap. Relocatable blocks can be made purgeable. This means that

the Memory Manager can throw them away if it needs the space. Typically, many
resources are made purgeable.

At first thought, this sounds disastrous: it’s not bad enough that things are
getting moved around, but now they’re being completely thrown away! Purged
resources are usually not a problem. By using the Resource Manager call

GetResource, you can ensure that a resource is actually in memory before attempting to use it (always a good idea). If the resource is already in memory, the

GetResource call will simply return its handle; if not, it will be loaded. This is a very
low-overhead way to make sure that the resource is in memory before you use it.
Also, note that just making a block purgeable does not necessarily mean that it
willbe purged. It will only be purged if its space is needed for some other block that
has to be loaded or created. When a block is marked purgeable it isn’t immediately

thrown away, but it does get sent to purgeatory.

Check that error.

When you call GetResource, the Resource Manager will

return a handle to the resource, whether it’s already in memory or has to be

loaded from disk. If it can’t find the resource at all, it'll return Nil (a handle
whose value is zero) as its function result. You should always check

~GetResource calls for this error.

Chapter2

Things in Memory

Just as you can make a block temporarily immovable by calling HLock, you can

also make a block nonpurgeable, that is, prevent the Memory Manager from purging it. You do this with the HNoPurge call. Of course, there’s a corresponding
HPurge call that makes a block purgeable.
What things can safely be made purgeable? Resources have resource attributes
that provide some information about them, and one of these attributes tells

whether the resource will be purgeable or nonpurgeable when it’s loaded into
memory. You can set this attribute with most of the resource compilers and

resource editors available for Macintosh. In addition, you can override the resource
attribute after loading the resource by using the HPurge and HNoPurge calls.

Most any resource can safely be made purgeable. Resources that you don’t use

often are the best candidates for being made purgeable. Be careful of MENU resources.
The Menu Manager assumes that MENU resources are nonpurgeable, and if you make
one purgeable, you'll probably get a system error very soon after the MENU is purged.
In general, it’s not a good idea to make anything purgeable that’s not a

resource. If you do, you're on your own about making sure that you do the right

things before the block is blown away; you may be interested in reading about the
Memory Manager’s PurgeProc in Inside Macintosh.

We can now summarize (in Figure 2-9) the three kinds of structures that are
used to hold data in memory: variables, relocatable heap blocks, and nonrelocatable heap blocks. By knowing that variables and nonrelocatables never move,
you've taken the first step toward eliminating the paranoia that surrounds the
Macintosh Memory Manager.

Figure 2-9.

Kinds of structures in memory

Kind

Location

How created

Comments

variable

stack

application declared

never moves

nonrelocatable

heap

NewPtr call

never moves

relocatable

heap

NewHandle call

can move

How relocation works
There are still several pieces of vital information that are necessary to completely
understand what's happening in memory. We said (twice!) that relocation of
blocks only occurs at well-defined times, and now we'll define those times.
One simple statement defines the essence of when you can expect relocation
to occur:

_ Fact. The Memory Manager only relocates blocks when it’s trying to find ©
space to create a new block or enlarge an existing one.

35

36

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

That's it. In other words, the Memory Manager does not relocate blocks just for
the heck of it (really!). It relocates blocks when it’s trying to allocate memory, either
to a new block (as with NewHandle and NewPtr) or to an existing block (with
SetHandleSize or SetPtrSize).

Even when your application makes one of these calls, there’s no guarantee that
relocation of any blocks will take place. In particular, when the Memory Manager
allocates a new relocatable block, it’s not very picky about where the new block
goes, since the new block can be moved in the future anyway. If the Memory
Manager finds a long enough run of consecutive free bytes anywhere in the heap,
it will allocate the new block there.

The Memory Manager is considerably more choosy about where it puts nonrelocatable blocks, however, as we mentioned earlier. It will go to great lengths to

make sure that a new nonrelocatable block is placed as low in the heap as possible

so that it won't fragment the heap. It gets real zealous, relocating or even purging
blocks, if necessary, to achieve that goal.
So now you know that the Memory Manager will never relocate anything

unless it’s trying to allocate some memory. In fact, there are only eight calls in the
Memory Manager that can trigger a relocation, and most applications only use four

of them: NewHandle,

NewPtr, SetHandleSize, and SetPtrSize. They’re all listed in

Figure 2-10. Let’s discuss each of them. We’ve already mentioned

NewHandle and

NewPtr; they obviously allocate new blocks. SetHandleSize and SetPtrSize are
used to resize existing blocks. If you use either of these calls to make a block larger,
memory will be allocated. These are the only commonly used calls that can trigger

relocation.
The other four calls are rarely used, and some of them are pretty obscure. One
is ReallocHandle, which is used to allocate a new relocatable block with an existing
handle. The final three calls all manipulate the heap in different ways and give

statistics back: MaxMem reports the largest contiguous free space in the heap after
relocating and purging; CompactMem returns the size of the largest contiguous

Figure 2-10.

Memory Manager calls that

can trigger heap compaction
Commonly used:

NewHandle

NewPtr
SetHandleSize*
SetPtrSize*
Less common:

ReallocHandle
MaxMem

CompactMem
ResrvMem
*Only if the call attempts to make the block
larger.

Chapter2

Things in Memory

free block after relocating only (no purging); and ResrvMem tries to create a space
at the lowest place in the heap by purging and compacting.

Fake-out.. Now we've gota contradiction: we said that the only calls that
could cause relocation were those that allocated memory,but the last three

calls, MaxMem, CompactMem, and ReservMem don’t actually allocate any
space—they just move things around. It's true that these calls don’t really

allocate any space, but they sort of “fool’’ the Memory Managerinto thinking.

that some memory is about to be allocatedin order to accomplish their tasks.
In any case, they can causerelocation tooccur, so they complete. our list.

N ewPtr calls ResrvMem. ‘The actionof ResrvMem may sound familiar to

sounds exactlylike thedensptée we> had for NewPtr.In fact,NewPtr calls

ReservMemin the ROM to open thespace lowin the heap before allocating

the new block. You'll find 2alot ofthisbehavior‘in the ROM, routines call other
routines all the time. .

Once you know the calls that can cause relocation, you've taken another giant
step toward understanding the Memory Manager. Unfortunately, just knowing
these eight calls doesn’t tell you everything. Since many of the ROM routines call
other ROM routines, you can easily get an indirect call to one of the relocationtriggering routines. For example, GetResource may call NewHandle, potentially
causing relocation; MoreMasters calls NewPtr, which may cause relocation. Luckily, Inside Macintosh includes an appendix that lists all the routines that might call

the relocation-triggering Memory Manager routines.
As we discussed in Chapter 1, some of the Macintosh system software is loaded

from disk. Apple usually releases new versions of the disk-based system a couple of
times each year, and a new release can contain a new version of any system routine.
So, it’s possible that a routine that’s not listed as causing relocation in Inside Macin-

tosh can suddenly become an offender. Because of this uncertainty, it’s a good idea
to assume that any system call can cause relocation. Even if you do this, it’s important to remember the principles behind relocation that you've read in this chapter.

There’s one other common situation in which the Memory Manager can relocate blocks in the heap. It happens when your application calls a routine that is in
another segment, like this fragment:

case

myEvent.what

inMenuBar:

of

DoCommand

(MenuSelect

(myEvent.where)
);

37

38

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

If DoCommand is in another segment, this call will cause that segment (a
CODE resource, remember) to be loaded into memory. If there’s not enough contiguous free memory in the heap for the segment, relocation can happen. So you
must add intersegment calls to the list of things that can cause relocation.
Actually, this relocation trigger fits right in with the original statement that the
Memory Manager relocates only when it needs more space. When your application
calls a routine in another segment, it causes a GetResource call to load in the needed

CODE resource, and GetResource will call NewHandle to get space for the CODE
resource if it’s not already in memory.

produce implicit ROM calls where you‘don’texpect them.-One placeyoull
find these routines is in a compiler’ s built-in functions. For example, a C
compiler may have a printf function that, invisibly to the programmer, calls a

ROM routine that could cause relocation of objects. Your development sys-

tem may tell you if it has routines like this. If source codeis provided, you can

check for yourself. If you're not sure, see Being Paranoid, which follows.

The potential causes of relocation are summarized in Figure 2-11.

Figure 2-11.

Causes of relocation

Directly calling any of the eight Memory Manager routines (see Figure 2-10)

Calling a system routine that calls any of the eight Memory Manager routines
(see Inside Macintosh, Appendix B)
Calling a routinein another code segment of your application
(this may call GetResource, which may call NewHandle)
Calling a development system-supplied library routine, such as printf
(this may call a relocation-triggering ROM call)

By using the “evil eight” list in Figure 2-10, together with the Inside Macintosh

appendix and your knowledge of your application’s segmenting, you now have
the ability to absolutely guarantee where relocation will not occur in your application. Take a moment to congratulate yourself—this is some significant knowledge!

OK, now that we’ve figured that out, let’s discover why this newfound knowledge is so valuable and then put it to work. Since a handle is always a valid way to

get a block, why should it matter when relocation occurs or what blocks it happens
to? In general, it’s not a problem if you always use the handle to access a block.

Using a handle to access a block is called double-dereferencing, since you're going
through two levels of indirection.

Chapter2

Things in Memory

Sometimes, though, you don’t use the handle to get to a relocatable block.

Instead, you may use the master pointer, which points directly to the block. Using

the master pointer to access the block is also called single-dereferencing, or just

dereferencing. (Figure 2-12 demonstrates the difference between dereferencing
and double-dereferencing.) There are two ways to dereference a handle: explicit
dereferencing and implicit dereferencing. Aren’t those impressive sounding
words? Wait until you tell your friends that you’re doing some explicit dereferencing. Don’t be intimidated by these terms, though—we'll describe exactly what they
mean and why they’re important.

Heap block

Data

Heap block

Data
’

Master pointer

112830

r

Handle

52024

Pointer

112830

Handle“

Pointer”

Double-dereference

Single-dereference

Figure 2-12.

Single- versus double-dereferencing

Explicit dereferencing
An explicit dereference takes place when you make a copy of a block’s master
pointer and then use that copy to directly access the block. For example, consider
the program fragment in Listing 2-1.

This little program fragment will create a relocatable heap block that’s just big
enough to hold an “aRecord” (an integer, a Boolean, and 1000 more integers). It
then uses the for loop to initialize the values in the array so that each value is the
same as its index. In the for loop, each assignment is done by double-dereferencing
the handle to the record, so it will work fine.

39

40

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

(—

Listing 2-1.
program Fragment;

TYPE aRecord = record
myNum

:

myBool

integer;
:

IyArray

boolean;

:

array

[1..1000]

of

integer;

end;
aPtr =

“aRecord;

aHdl

“aPtr;

=

VAR myHdl

:

aHdl;

sparePtr

counter

:

:

aPtr;

integer;

begin

myHdl
{Creates

:= NewHandle

for counter

:=

1

to

myHd1l”~*.myArray

{Initialize
{for

(SizeOf

(aRecord)
);

a relocatable block big
1000

enough

[counter]

myArray

[1]

=

an

aRecord}

:= counter;

each value of myArray to

example,

for

do

1,

its

myArray

Getting through the compiler.

index;}

[345]

=

345,

etc.}

The first line of codein Listing 2-1 will never

make it through the compiler. Here’s the problem: NewHandleis a function

that returns a value of type Handle (check Inside Macintosh); myHdl is a
variable of type aHdl (check the declaration). Although you know that Handle and aHd] are the same thing, the Pascal compiler thinks they’re different,
and you'll get a Type Mismatch Error if you try to compile this line.

_ romtunately, most Macintosh Pascal compilers provide an easy way

programs.Youcan convert :a. value of one type to another to make thecom-

piler happy. In otherwords, we want to make themight side of this assignment

myHdl = aHdl (NewHandle injxeot (aneoord) ))
Using aHdl like this causes the compiler to change the expression’s type to

aHdl, just like the left side of the statement. Functionally, all that this technique doesis satisfythe Pascal compiler’s strong type checking. Thisis called

type casting, and you can read more about it in the How to Get around

Pascal’s Type Checking sectionin Chapter 8. Type castingin C worksin much

the sameway.

Chapter2

Things in Memory

4l

Experienced Pascal programmers may realize that there’s some room for effi-

ciency improvement here. Although the double-dereference appears to be a trivial
accomplishment when written in Pascal, an experienced (or fanatically stingy)
Pascal programmer will realize that the object code that the for loop produces will
need two instructions to double-dereference the handle 1000 times (every time

through the loop), getting the same master pointer every time, since the block
never moves while the program is in the loop. It would certainly be more efficient

if we could dereference the handle only once, outside the loop. That would leave
just a single instruction to dereference the master pointer inside the loop. This
variation on the program fragment, shown in Listing 2-2, does just that (the

changes are shown in bold).

(—

\

Listing 2-2.
begin
myHdl

:= NewHandle

(SizeOf

(aRecord));

{Creates a relocatable block big enough for an
sparePtr

aRecord}

:= myHdl’;

{Dereferences myHdl,copying the master pointer
for counter

:=

1

to

1000

sparePtr” .myArray

[counter]

:= counter;

{Initialize each value of myArray to
{for example,

myArray

[1]

=

into sparePtr}

do

1,

its

myArray

index;}

[345]

=

345,

etc.}

Ne

y,
This version accomplishes exactly the same function, initializing the values in

the array, but it does it by dereferencing the handle only once instead of 1000 times.

Is this technique safe? Let’s examine exactly what's going on here. We said earlier
that a handle contains the address of a master pointer and that a master pointer
contains the address of a relocatable block. By writing
SparePtr

:= MyHdl’;

we put the contents of the master pointer (that is, the address of the relocatable
block) in sparePtr. Then comes the for loop, which relies on sparePtr (1000 times!)
to be a correct pointer to the record, which is a relocatable block.
Is it valid for us to assume that sparePtr, a copy of the master pointer, remains
a correct pointer to the record all through the loop? The answer lies in determining
if the block that the master pointer points to could be relocated. If the block is
moved, the master pointer will be updated, but not copies of it (like sparePtr). So,
if the block is not relocated after sparePtr gets assigned to myHdl’, then the master
pointer will stay the same, and sparePtr will be correct.
Is there anything that comes between the sparePtr assignment and the use of
sparePtr that would cause relocation? No. There are no calls to the Macintosh

42

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

ROM, no calls to any procedures or functions in other segments, in fact, no calls to
anything else at all. Since there is no chance that the block will be relocated, we can
count on sparePtr to continue pointing to the record throughout the loop. Listing
2-2 will work fine.

We interruptthis message.SincesparePtris.used iin the very next statement after it’ S assigned, without anything intervening that can cause reloca-

interrupt-driven ‘routine executes during this time and causes ‘relocation?
Couldn’t that mess things up?

3

The answer is a firm yes-but. Yes, if some intemupt-driven piece of code

calling NewHandle, it couldchange the master pointer and ruin sparePtr.

You shouldn't worry about it, though, because interrupt-driven routines are

~ prohibited from making any call that relieson the validity of theheap. Thisis
because itmay have.rie ay the oy vee itself
neat in the

make memory allocation calls.

So, if an interrupt-driven routine is.relobating things
¢ in the heap, it’s

breaking the rules, and it will run into trouble eventually when it tries to mess

_ with a heap that’s in the middle ofrelocation.

:

In Listing 2-3 we mess things up again.

(

Listing 2-3.
begin
myHdl
{Creates

:= NewHandle

(SizeOf

(aRecord)
);

a relocatable block big enough

SparePtr

for

an

{Dereferences myHdl,copying the master pointer
for counter := 1 to 1000 do

begin
SsparePtr”.myArray
DrawChar
end;

aRecord}

:= myHdl’;

(chr

[counter]

(counter)
);

:=

counter;

into

sparePtr}

|

Chapter2

Things in Memory

What have we done here? There’s now an additional statement in the loop, a
call to the ROM routine DrawChar. By looking in Inside Macintosh’s Appendix B, we

find that DrawChar is on the “routines that may move blocks in the heap” list. This
absolutely destroys the credibility of sparePtr. Since DrawChar might cause things

to be relocated, it could cause our record to move. This would update its master
pointer, of course, but not sparePtr. This is the hazard of dereferencing a handle. As

long as you can guarantee that the object will not be relocated while you're using a copy
of the master pointer, everything will be fine. In this case, we can’t guarantee that,
because the call to DrawChar might cause any relocatable block in the heap to move.
What happens if the record moves after a DrawChar call? The next time
through the loop the program will continue using sparePtr as if it still pointed to

the block, although it no longer does. The program would begin assigning values to
bytes in memory that used to belong to the record, but now are either free or are
allocated to another block. This would cause your data to be messed up, at best; at
worst, it could cause a system error. Figure 2-13 shows how this might look.

An important question remains: why bother using a dereferenced handle?
Who cares if it takes another assembly language instruction, at the cost of a few
microseconds, to do the extra dereference within the loop? One answer to this

question is that you may have a time-critical part of your application that needs all
the time savings it can get. If you make sure that no relocation will happen while

Heap block

at 44618
Heap block

at 20464

Data

Data
20464

;

sparePtr

Master

pointer at

8428

myHadl
After

| 20464 |
,

[8428 |
sparePtr :=myHdl’

Figure 2-13.

Dangling pointer

|
20464
vicsier
pointer a

8428

(fixed by

;

sparePtr

|44618 |

Memory Manager)

myHadll

|

ry

8428|

now points

— torandom
memory!

(block's
former

—[ocation)

After DrawChar causes heap block
to be relocated

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

you
re using the dereferenced handle, you should feel perfectly comfortable about
saving time this way.

Of course, you may want to do it this way even if you’re not in a time-critical
part of your code. Maybe the thought of unnecessary waste of precious processor
cycles just drives you nuts. Maybe you want to show off your code to your friends.
That's all right, too.

But maybe you're not completely comfortable doing this... read on.

Where's the VAR?

You may have noticed something interesting about the

fragments in the preceding section. Athough we declared TYPE aRecord, we
never declared a VAR of that type—yet we used a handle and a pointer to

aRecord and accessed its fields (the declarations are repeated here for your
convenience). What's going on here?

TYPE aRecord = record
- myNum : integer;
myBool

:

myArray

end;

:

boolean;

:

array [1..1000]
of integer;

7

,

s

|

|

aPtr = “aRecord;:
aHdl = “aPtr;
AW

44

VAR myHdl

: aHdl;

sparePtr : aPtr;
counter

:

integer;

At the beginning of the program we allocated an object in the heap the size of
an aRecord. This reserves the bytes in memory that we used for the record's
storage. Remember that declaring a VAR means reserving space for it on the

stack; we're reserving space in the heap by calling NewHandle. Even though
the record is allocated on the heap, we can still use our handle and pointer to

get
to them. We'll discuss this technique later; for more information on keep-

ing your data in relocatable blocks, see the Random Access File I/O section in
Chapter 10.

Being paranoid
As we discussed earlier in this chapter, there is a way to guarantee absolutely that
a particular relocatable block will not be moved, even if one of the relocation
triggers is pulled. You do it by using the HLock call. This call takes a handle as its
only parameter. It sets a flag that tells the Memory Manager that this block can’t be
relocated.

Chapter2

Things in Memory

Macintosh programmers who don’t completely understand what's going onin
memory (they haven't read this chapter!) use HLock everywhere, sometimes for no
apparent reason other than to satisfy their own paranoia. For example, some pro-

grammers would call HLock (myHdl) before dereferencing it in Listing 2-2 and

then HUnlock (myHd)l) at the end of the for loop.
These calls would do no harm, but they would do no good either. Since we
determined that nothing could trigger relocation during the period when we were
using the dereferenced handle, there was no need to lock it. In Listing 2-3, how-

ever, it’s a different story. When we put the DrawChar call into the loop, creating a
potential for relocation, we caused sparePtr to become unreliable. But what if we
had locked the block before dereferencing it, and then unlocked it afterward, as in
Listing 2-4?

r

Listing 2-4.

begin
myHdl

:= NewHandle

(SizeOf

(aRecord));

{Creates a relocatable block big enough for an
HLock

aRecord}

(myHdl)
;

SparePtr

:= myHdl’;

{Dereferences myHdl,copying the master pointer
for counter

:=

1

to

1000

into sparePtr}

do

begin
sparePtr” .myArray
DrawChar

(chr

[counter]

:=

counter;

(counter)
);

end;

HUnlock

(myHd1l)
;

Ne
By locking the block, we’ve guaranteed that it won’t move in the heap. Even if
DrawChar causes relocation of heap blocks to occur, our block won’t be moved
because we called HLock. So this example is safe, and the call to HLock is necessary
to guarantee that SparePtr stays valid.

Implicit dereferencing
Sometimes, when you least expect it, your friendly old compiler will pull an
implicit dereference on you. Don’t panic, though. You can easily recognize when
this is happening and how to deal with it.

An implicit dereference takes place when your compiler makes a temporary
copy of a master pointer, just as we did in the example in Listing 2-2, but it does so
without an explicit assignment like sparePtr : = myHdlI’;. Many compilers will do this
in certain situations in order to optimize the object code, that is, make it smaller or

45

46

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

faster. In other cases, it happens as a normal consequence of the compiler’s operation. Once again, the exact details of when these implicit dereferences take place
depend on what development system you're using. We'll discuss what MPW Pascal does.

Let’s declare a simple (-minded) routine:
procedure setToZero

(VAR aNumber:integer);

begin

aNumber

:=

0;

{That’s all this procedure does.}

end;

Now let's recall our record declaration from the previous section:
TYPE

aRecord = record

MyNum

:

integer;

myBool:

boolean;

myArray

:

array

[1..1000]

of

integer;

end;

Let's make a call to our simple setToZero procedure with the integer field of the
record:
setToZero

(myHdl”~~.MyNum);

What actually gets passed to setToZero? You might expect that the value of
MyNum would be passed. However, notice that the parameter to setToZero is

declared as a VAR parameter, since setToZero alters its value. This is known as a
variable parameter. Since setToZero is going to change the value of the thing we’re
passing to it, Pascal can’t simply pass the value. To change the parameter, setToZero

must know where it is in memory—its address. In fact, this is what every Pascal
compiler does when it passes a variable parameter on the stack (see Figure 2-14).

The same thing happens in C when you pass a pointer to a parameter by using the
& operator, which would look something like this:
setTozZero

This

(&((**myHdl) .MyNum) )

presents

an

interesting problem.

Pascal

will

pass

a

pointer

to

myHdlTM.MyNum when we call setToZero. But a pointer to myHdl*MyNum is a

fragile thing. Since this field is part of relocatable heap block, it can move, and the
pointer to it that’s passed on the stack may become invalid. This can happen if

(1) setToZero is in another segment, since loading its segment might cause relocation, or (2) if setToZero calls any ROM routines that can cause relocation. In our

example, setToZero doesn’t call any relocation triggers, so (2) isn’t applicable, but
(1) could happen if setToZero is in another segment.

Chapter2

Stack

Things in Memory

47

Heap

24180: | myHdl“ .myNum
Stack pointer

(SP) ———_
Figure 2-14.

VAR parameter

The moral to this story is this: although we've used an apparently safe method
by starting with the handle and double-dereferencing it, the Pascal compiler foils
us by implicitly dereferencing the handle; that is, relying on a pointer. This situation is illustrated in Figure 2-15.

A similar problem arises when you assign a function result to a field of a
relocatable block, like this:
myHd1**.MyNum

Stack

:=

someFunction

Heap

;
(someParam)

Stack

Heap

myHdlTM .myNum

| Relocated

myHdl .myNum

Address of parameter
is pushed on stack
Figure 2-15.

Implicit dereference

New code
segment

New code segment containing
setToZero is loaded; pointer
on stack is now invalid

48

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

Since the result of the function will be assigned to myHdITM. MyNum, Pascal
gets a pointer to it, very much as we saw it do with a variable parameter in the
previous example. Once again, this can be fatal if anything causing relocation
occurs in someFunction or if someFunction is in another segment.
Didn’t we say that a double-dereference was always a safe way to refer to a

relocatable object? Yes, it is always safe, but in these cases the compiler has turned
a double-dereference into a single-dereference. So we can now make a definitive
statement:

Fact. Double-dereferencing a handle in your application will always lead
you to the relocatable object.

Warning. Beware of the compiler.

Although double-dereferencing a han-

dle is always a safe path to a relocatable object, remember that some compil-

ers, especially Pascal compilers, might create implicit dereferences. You don’t
have to worry about this with most C compilers.

Interrupt time.

There are some special rules for using handles in code that

executes at interrupt time. See Appendix B for more information about using
handles in interrupt-drive code.

Once you're aware that these implicit dereferences are happening, they’re
easy to fix. The most obvious way to prevent them from being a problem is to lock

the memory object by calling HLock on the handle. Remember, though, that locking the object makes it nonrelocatable and so can fragment the free space in the

heap while it’s locked. A way that won’t mess up the heap is to make a local copy

of the variable you want to pass; that is, assign it to a local variable, first for the
procedure call:
VAR localNum

:

localNum
setToZero

integer;

:= myHdl”~~ .MyNum;
(localNum)
;

Chapter2

Things in Memory

49

and also for the function call:
VAR localNum

:

localNum

integer;

:= someFunction

myHdl”~*~ .MyNum

:=

(someParam)
;

localNum;

By doing this, localNum is assigned its value safely: start with the handle and
then double-dereference. When we call setToZero, we use the local variable. Since
it’s allocated on the stack (like all local variables), it won’t move. Same thing with

someFunction. After the function returns, we can safely assign the returned value

into the record. Easy, now that you know when to expect it!
Maybe the most insidious kind of implicit dereference takes place when you
use Pascal’s seemingly innocent with statement. (There’s really nothing like this in

C,so if you're not interested in Pascal and you're getting sleepy, you can skip ahead
to the next shaded box.) Most Pascal programmers think that with is just a method
of shorthand. Listing 2-5 gives an example.

(~

_

Listing 2-5.

with myHdl*“*~

do begin

myNum

:=

myBool

1234;

:=

myArray

true;

[1]

:=

1;

end;

Ne

yy
Four out of five Pascal programmers surveyed will tell you that that’s just a

source code shorthand way of doing this:
myHdl~*~.myNum

:=

myHd1l”~~.myBool

myHdl”*~.myArray

1234;

:=

true;

[1]

:=

1;

Ah, but that clever Pascal compiler: the with statement is not just shorthand for
you, the source code author. It’s also used by the compiler to optimize your code.
Let’s see how this works by looking at the more conventional example in Listing 2-6.

50

HOW IT ALL WORKS

PART ONE

/

Listing

2-6.

VAR simpleRec

:

record
first

:

second:
third :

boolean;

integer;
string [255];

end;

simplePtr

simplePtr
with

:=

:

ptr;

@simpleRec;

simplePtr~

do begin

second:=

5678;

first

true;

:=

end;

Z
When you write something like with simplePtr* do, the compiler knows that
you're about to work with fields in a record pointed to by simplePtr. The compiler
knows where in memory simplePtr’ is stored, and it knows how far from the
beginning of the record each of its fields is stored. So, to optimize, it puts the
address of the record (that is, a pointer to simpleRec) into a register, a special
location within the 68000 itself, so that it can access it quickly. Then, when you refer
to fields of the record, such as simplePtr*.second, it calculates how far from the
beginning of the record second is, quickly adds this offset to the pointer it stashed
in the register, and then stores 5678 there. Figure 2-16 illustrates how this works.

Stack

with simplePtr* do...

68000 register

58296:

simpleRec

58296

With statement puts the record's address in a
register (a memory location within the 68000 itself)
Figure 2-16.

A with statement

Chapter2

Things in Memory

This is a good way for the compiler to optimize your programa

little. Our

example here, simpleRec, is a static (stack-based) variable, so there’s no problem
with saving a pointer to it—it can never move. However,as you might imagine, you
can get into a little trouble when relocatable blocks are about. In Listing 2-5, the
record named in the with statement is a double-dereferenced handle. Once again,

Pascal is doing just a little something special. To optimize the with statement, the
compiler will put a pointer to the record in a register, as we discussed previously. But

look out—the record is a relocatable block, and that pointer is extremely fragile! One
relocation trigger within the body of the with statement and you can (at least potentially) wave goodbye to your record as it floats out of sight. Just because you're used to
disaster by now, there’s a graphic illustration of this kind of thing in Figure 2-17.
In the case of our example, Listing 2-5, we can guarantee that this problem will

not happen. See if you can figure out how we know this before continuing. Go
ahead ...

I'll wait.

The entire body of the with statement contains just the three assignments to
myNum, myBool, and myArray[1]. We know that these are not relocation triggers,

so we know that the record will not move in the heap. Since the record won’t move,
we know that the pointer to the record that the compiler put in the register will be
valid. If you figured this out, you deserve a cookie; if not, you should study this
chapter some more.

What if there were relocation triggers in the body of the with statement, like a
GetResource call or a call to a routine in another segment? Just HLock the handle
before the with statement and then HUnlock it after. Remember that the locked
block can fragment the heap, so you may want to skip the with altogether and just

With myHdlTM

do...

Heap

Heap

68000 register

| Relocated

With statement puts

record's address in a
register

Figure 2-17.

A statement in body of

the with statement calls
NewHandle, causing relocation

With statement causes dangling pointer

Bil

52

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

write it out longhand if you find that your heap is getting chopped up by allocation
of new blocks in the with statement. Once again, the most important thing about
this kind of implicit dereference is for you to be aware of it, able to see it coming, and
able to work around it (by HLocking or avoiding the with).

C programmers. If you use C, you may be chuckling by now. In C, you’re
generally a little closer to the machine, so you get more warning when a
handle is dereferenced. Whenever a pointer to something must be passed,
you must specify it explicitly, so you can watch out for passing pointers to
relocatable objects. Also, C doesn’t really have anything analogous to Pascal's
with, so that implicit dereference doesn’t happen.

That’s about it for the problem of dangling pointers to relocatable objects.
Figure 2-18 has a list of the potential kinds of handle dereferences that can kill you
and suggested remedies.
Any of the situations listed in Figure 2-18 can cause a dereferenced handle to be

used. If this occurs, any of the situations listed in Figure 2-11 can move the relocatable block, causing the dereferenced handle to become incorrect. To avoid this
problem, use the remedies listed in Figure 2-18.

Figure 2-18.

Problem dereferencing situations

Dereferencing situation

How to avoid it

Explicit dereference:

Don't do it; double-dereference

thePtr := theHdl
Implicit dereferences:
Pascal dereferences in with statement:
with theHdl” do

the handle instead: theHdl”
Avoid relocation triggers in body
of with statement; if you can’t,

don’t use with, or HLock/HUnlock.
Parameter passed in cross-segment call:

Copy the parameter into a local

SetToZero (my Hdl*.myNum)

variable before calling, then
pass the local instead:
localNum := myHdlTM. myNum;
SetToZero (localNum)

Function result:
myHdl“.myNum : = aFunction (xyz)

Use a local variable as the
function result, then copy it into
the heap block:
localNum := aFunction (xyz);
myHdI~myNum := localNum

Chapter2

Things in Memory

Things to remember

e Applications use space in two memory areas, the application heap and the
stack.

e Under MultiFinder, or System 7;each application has its own application
heap and stack.

¢ Global and local variables are kept on the stack.

e Objects created with newHandle and NewPtr, including most blocks created by the Toolbox, are keptin the heap.

3

¢ Heap blocks may be either relocatable or nonrelocatable.

e When you have the freedom of choice in creating a heap block, you should
make it relocatable, since nonrelocatables.can fragment, or clog up, your
heap, and heap blocks must consist of contiguous bytes.

e Relocatable blocks can move, but only at well-defined, predictable times:
when there’s a call (directly or indirectly) to NewHandle, NewPtr,

SetHandleSize, and SetPtrSize, as well as to four other,
less commonly used

Memory Manager calls.

e You should be careful not to single-dereference a handle and then use the
dereferenced handle after a heap compaction has occurred.

e Ifnecessary, you can ensure that a relocatable block won’t move by HLocking
it, but you should be sure to unlock things as soon as you can, and you

should call MoveHHi on a block before locking it for very long.

93

C

H

A

PT

E

R

3

More about Heaps
and Fragmentation
In this chapter we'll continue delving into how Macintosh heaps work and what
happens to the things in them. We'll also talk in depth about some important data
structures that you'll find associated with heap objects, including the heap zone

header, heap block header, and master pointer.
We'll discuss how debugging Macintosh heap structures has evolved in recent

years with the emergence of 32-bit addressing, and we'll talk about how to deal
with the fact that the data structures in 32-bit heaps aren't documented.

We'll talk about how you can reduce fragmentation, which can make more
memory available to your application. We'll also talk about using segmentation to

split your program up into individually loadable pieces, which is another way of
conserving memory space.

What does “out of memory” really mean?
The memory map back in Figure 2-1 showed that the application heap and the
stack occupy the same part of memory, and the arrows suggest that they move
toward each other. That's true: as the stack expands, it reaches downward into

memory; as the heap grows, it moves upward toward the top of the stack. If these
two friendly adversaries ever collide, you’re out of memory. Let’s take a look at
how that happens.

DD

56

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

We discussed earlier how objects in memory are allocated. We said that stack

objects are created when the high-level language programmer declares a variable,
as with VAR in Pascal, and that heap blocks are created by calling Memory Manager
routines like NewHandle and NewPtr. When an application starts up, both the
stack and the heap are allotted a certain amount of RAM.
This allocation is controlled by several global variables. For example, the size
allotted to the stack is taken from a global variable called DefltStack. A pointer to
the start of the heap is kept in the variable called ApplZone, and HeapEnd contains
the address of the end of the heap. The heap begins with a 6K allocation, but the
system also sets aside an area past the end of the heap that may be used by either
the heap or the stack, whichever asks for it first. Since this space is usually claimed
by the heap, it’s often called the growable heap space. The end of this area is
pointed to by ApplLimit. This setup is shown in Figure 3-1. Under MultiFinder,
every application’s partition is divided this way.

In almost every application, the bulk of RAM is taken up by the heap rather
than the stack. When you ask the Memory Manager for a new block by calling
NewHandle or NewPtr, it first attempts to find the space within the confines of the
current heap, that is, somewhere between ApplZone and HeapEnd. If it can’t

allocate the requested space there, the Memory Manager will grow the heap by
moving HeapEnd farther up in memory, if there’s any “growable” space left.

Stack

ApplLimit

——

Growable
heap space

HeapEnd

>

Application
heap

Applzone

+ ——e>

Figure 3-1.

Partial Macintosh memory map

Chapter3

More about Heaps and Fragmentation

One drawback to the technique used by the Memory Manager to allocate space
is that it will relocate and purge blocks in the heap before attempting to grow the
heap. In most applications, the initial stack space that the system sets aside is

plenty, and we would prefer to pregrow the heap to its maximum size. This makes

purging of blocks an almost last-resort technique for the Memory Manager, ensuring that it won’t try to purge blocks unless the heap is fully grown.

Since so many applications want to pregrow their heaps to AppI|Limit, a routine called MaxApplZone is provided to do just that automatically. By calling
MaxApplZone once at the beginning of your application, you will ensure that your

heap is grown to its maximum size. Tests done by Keith Rollin of Macintosh Programming Secrets fame have shown that calling MaxApplZone can significantly
improve the performance of your program.

When the Memory Manager needs to grow the heap, it moves HeapEnd higher

and higher in memory, but it can never move it higher than AppIlLimit.
When you request memory from the Memory Manager and it can’t find
enough, even after purging purgeable blocks, relocating relocatable blocks, and

growing the heap as far as it can, it makes one last-ditch effort to find enough
memory to satisfy your request: it yells to you for help. This yell is in the form of a
function call. This function, which you usually include in your application’s code,

is called a grow zone function.
Here’s how it works: when the Memory Manager determines that there’s not

enough room in the heap to fulfill a request for memory, it calls your grow zone
function, passing to you the number of bytes it needs to fulfill the memory request.

Your application should then do something to free up heap space, if possible. If

you're able to free some memory, you set the value of your grow zone function
result to a nonzero number; if you can’t free up anything, you should return a zero.
If you are able to free some memory, but not enough to make the Memory
Manager happy, it will call you again (it’s very persistent). It will continue calling

you until it gets enough memory or you signal that you can’t find any more (by
returning zero).

What can you do to free up memory in your grow zone function? The best
thing to do is to assume in advance that the grow zone function will be called and
plan for it. For example, you can run your application with some of your most

important resources set to nonpurgeable. This will keep them in memory and help
the application run faster, since the resources won't have to be reloaded from disk

after they’re purged and needed again. Then, when your grow zone function is
called and there’s no more space for luxurious living, you can make them purgeable and return a nonzero result when your grow zone function is called.

57

58

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

Don’t look back. Note that one of the things you can’t doin a grow zone

functionis cancel the memory allocation request that triggered the callin the
first place. The Memory Manager must either find the memory or return an
_ error (memFullErr). Asking for memoryis like}
‘jumping off a cliff: once you've .
— done it, there’s no turning back. |
|

If you’ve looked everywhere, even behind the couch, and just can’t find a

single byte of memory, you'll return a zero as the grow zone function’s result. If the
memory request came from the ROM itself, this situation will often cause the
system to abandon ship and generate system error 25 (can't allocate requested
memory block in the heap). What a terrible thing to do to users! There’s a moral
here: we should try to be sure that we never run out of memory this way.
One technique for doing this is to have a special “monitor” block in the heap
that does nothing but tell us how the heap allocation is doing. In this technique,

you allocate a relocatable block of a predetermined size, say 30K, when your application starts up. Then, if your grow zone function gets called, you know that you’re

within about 30K of running out of memory, minus the amount of memory
requested in the grow zone call. (For this to work, your heap must be reasonably
free of fragmentation.) You can then use SetHandleSize to reduce the size of your

monitor block, and the newly freed memory will be allocated to the new block.
By using this technique, you can have a better handle (no pun intended) on

what's going on in your heap. This way, when your monitor block starts getting
small, you can issue a warning to your user, which says to do something that will

free up more memory (like closing windows or saving a document), or you can
have your application take some action of its own. You should also include a final
warning” for when your monitor block gets precariously small, giving the user
instructions on how to free up space immediately. With careful planning, you

should be able to avoid a system error. In the worst case, when your grow zone gets
a memory request that you can’t fulfill, even by eliminating the monitor block, you

should force the user to save any work in memory and then quit the application.
Notice that the name “grow zone function” is pretty nondescriptive about

what it actually does. The function doesn’t really grow the heap; it tries to create

more free space by various means, but heap ’growing” is done automatically by

the Memory Manager.

Chapter3

Warning.

More about Heaps and Fragmentation

Be careful what you try to do within a grow zone function. The

function is being called because the heap is almost full, so any operations that
require even a small amount of memory, like putting up a dialog, may fail.
The best strategy is to keep enough memory in the monitor block to handle

allocation of objects needed
in the “final warning” situation. In other words,
if you determine that you need 2K to execute your “final warning” procedure, don’t ever let the size of your monitor block get below 2K. If you can’t

keep it above that size, you should force the user to save and then quit.

This is just a suggestion of things you can do when you're running out of heap
space. You can push the state of the art by coming up with your own techniques.

Remember this guideline: a well-written program should try to save the user from
ever seeing a system error.

Since the Macintosh has two different kinds of memory for an application, the
heap and the stack, there are two distinct kinds of out-of-memory conditions. We

just discussed what happens when the heap runs out of space. The stack can run out
of space, too, and the result is very similar: a system error, number 28 in this case. The
things that cause error 28 and the methods of prevention are a lot different, though.

All the blocks in the heap are allocated by calling the Memory Manager, which
is a piece of the ROM-based operating system. When it runs out of space, it signals

with an error. You might say that the heap is tame—everything that happens in the
heap is controlled by the Memory Manager. It can never grow beyond its limit,

which is kept in the system global called ApplLimit.
The stack, on the other hand, is a data structure that’s completely maintained

by the Macintosh’s microprocessor. Items are allocated on the stack by machine
language instructions, and any one of those instructions could cause the stack to

grow so much that it crashes into the heap. The Memory Manager is a Macintosh
concept that was invented long after the microprocessor was sealed in silicon, and
the microprocessor doesn’t know how to check before growing the stack to see if

it's about to crash into the heap. Compared to the heap, the stack is wild.
To help tame the stack just a little, the Macintosh operating system has implemented a tiny piece of ROM-based code called the stack sniffer. The stack sniffer

has the job of looking at the top of the stack every once in a while to see if it has
crashed into the heap. In this case, every once in a while is every sixtieth of a
second. When it checks, the stack sniffer looks to see if the top of the stack is lower
than the highest block in the heap. If it is, the stack has destroyed data in the heap,

we're in deep trouble, and the stack sniffer puts up system error 28. Figure 3-2
shows how this stack overflow error can happen.
There are two important things to notice here. The first is that, unlike the

out-of-heap-space problem, we can’t do anything when the stack runs into the
heap: there’s no “grow stack function.” Once the problem is known, the damage is

59

60

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

Stack

End of last
heap block

>

M

Application
heap

Stack grows
into heap
(system error 28)
Figure 3-2.

Stack overflow

already done, and data in the heap has already been smashed by the stack. The
second interesting thing is that the stack sniffer only checks things out every
sixtieth of a second. This may seem like plenty often to you and me, but it’s a long
time to a Macintosh. A lot of processing can happen in that time, and it’s possible

that the stack could grow into the heap, bash a few bytes, then sneak back into the
electronic vapor before a sixtieth of a second passes. In this case, the stack crash
goes unnoticed, until you try to use the corrupted memory that the stack

destroyed. This sounds pretty bad, but in practice it’s very rare that an unseen stack
overflow will cause a problem in this way. After all, it is just a sixtieth of a second.

Just something to think about when you're debugging.
What causes the stack to grow? As we've said, the stack is mainly used for local
variables and for parameters passed to routines. In addition, assembly language
routines (like the ones in the ROM) often use the stack as a place for keeping

variables temporarily. Also, remember that stack space fluctuates: when one routine calls another, which calls a third, each routine will use space for its parameters
and locals. As each routine ends, the space for its parameters and locals will be

reclaimed, and the stack will shrink.
The memory that the system gives your application for stack space is usually
more than enough for the parameters and local variables used by your own rou-

tines. Usually, stack overflows are caused by particular ROM routines that use large
amounts of stack space, most of which are noted in Inside Macintosh. If you get a
stack overflow when using one of these routines, you can use the information for
that routine in Inside Macintosh to work around the problem. If a call to one of your

Chapter3

More about Heaps and Fragmentation

own routines is causing the stack overflow, you may be able to rewrite it so that it
has fewer parameters or fewer local variables. You can determine how much stack
space your routines use by adding up the sizes of your parameters and local

variables according to the chart in Figure 3-3.

Warning.

If you're getting stack overflows, be sure you understand how

much space your local variables and parameters are using. For example, a
Pascal str255 takes 256 bytes, no matter how many characters of the string are

actually used. Also, look out for obscure types like text. With many compilers,
a variable of type text will take several hundred bytes of stack space. You

should also watch out for a compiler’s built-in routines. In particular, Pascal’s
concat call can take an enormous amount of stack space. The only sure way to
find out how much stack space a routine is using is to observe it by looking at

the compiled code and the stack itself while the suspected stack hog is exe-

cuting. We'll talk a lot more about this kind of stuff starting in Chapter 5.
More stack space.

_

If you've got something in your program that simply

needs a lot of stack space and can’t be changed, all is not lost. You can move
App!Limit lower to prevent the heap from growing. If you do this, be sure you

do so before calling MaxApplZone.

Figure 3-3.
Type

Sizes of data types
Size in bytes

Comment

Integer

2

Two’s complement integer (— 32768 to 32767)

Longint

4

Two's complement integer (— 2147483648 to 2147483647)

SignedByte

1

Two’s complement integer (— 128 to 127)

Boolean

1

Value in bit 0 (0 = false, 1 = true)

Char

2

ASCII code in low byte, high byte unused

Real

4

SANE single-precision format

Single

4

Same as Real

Double

8

SANE double-precision format

Extended

10

SANE

extended-precision format

Comp

8

SANE

computational format

String [n]

n+1

Length byte followed by ASCII codes

Byte

2

Two’s complement integer, value in low byte

Ptr

4

Address of data; includes any parameters preceded by @

Handle

4

Address of master pointer; includes any kind of handle

Point

4

QuickDraw coordinate

Rect

8

QuickDraw rectangle; two points (goaltending)

61

62

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

Blocks in heaps
Now that you know the basics about heaps and how they work, let’s explore them
and their data structures a little more. We've talked about two kinds of blocks in a
heap, relocatable and nonrelocatable. Ina heap, every byte belongs toa block. Bytes
that aren’t allocated to a relocatable or nonrelocatable block are collected together
into free blocks. So there are really three kinds of blocks in a heap: relocatable,
nonrelocatable, and free. Figure 3-4 gives some facts about these three types of
heap blocks.

Figure 3-4.

Types of heap blocks

Type

Comment

Relocatable

Can be purgeable or nonpurgeable, locked or unlocked; can be
relocated if unlocked
:

Nonrelocatable

Cannot be relocated or purged

Free

May have been previously allocated; several adjacent free blocks

may be combined when heap compaction occurs

As we've said, all these blocks are controlled by the Memory Manager. When a
program calls

NewHandle, the Memory Manager finds the bytes for the new block

and then creates the block in the heap. When a program calls DisposHandle, the

Memory Manager changes that block into a free block.
Although the Macintosh was not originally designed with a multitasking operating system, there was always more than one thing going on at a time, even before

MultiFinder was invented in 1987. For example, at one time, without MultiFinder,
a Macintosh can run Microsoft Word, the alarm clock desk accessory, the screen

saver desk accessory, and the control panel desk accessory. There can be lots of

other little programs in memory, too: the window, menu, and control definition
functions, the keyboard mapping function, and the AppleTalk drivers, just to name
a few. Many of these programs can allocate their own memory. Any of them could
just grab a chunk of memory and use it, without going through the Memory
Manager. Of course, this would create anarchy and nothing would work. So, to

keep the world from falling apart, everything in a Macintosh that wants memory
gets it either by asking the Memory Manager or by using the stack.

Heap zone header
A Macintosh heap begins with a heap zone header. The heap zone header gives
some important information about the heap that it’s attached to.

A heap zone

actually has a high-level language declaration, and you can see it in Figure 3-5.
A discussion of some of the important fields in this record will help us under-

stand how it works. The hFstFree field points to the master pointer that will be used

Chapter3

More about Heaps and Fragmentation

Type

Zone = Record
bkLim:

Ptr;

{last block in

purgePtr: Ptr;
hFstFree:

Ptr;

zcbFree: Ptr:

#..

{first free master pointer

:

.

gzProc: ProcPtr;

|

moreMast:

a

flags: Integer;

cntRel: Integer:

{grow zone function}
.

-

{number of master pointers

by MoreMasters}

allocated

©

{internal use}

. {unused (maybe someday
)}

maxRel::Integer;

cntNRel: Integer;

cntEmpty:

}

{total free bytes in zone}

Integer;

Bs

maxNRel:

zone}

{unlucky fellow - may be purged next}

{unused

(same
for next

a

:

5

fields)}

Integer;

Integer;
~

-cntHandles:

Integer;

minCBFree: Integer;
purgeProc: ProcPtr;. {called when a block is purged}
sparePtr:

Ptr;

allocPtr: Ptr;
heapData:

{in case of a flat

—

Integer;

end;

Figure 3-5.

(used internally)}

{used internally}
{first word in the heap}
|

Heap zone declaration

for the next relocatable block that’s allocated. When a new block is created, this field
will be updated to point to the next available master pointer. When the last available master pointer is used up, the Memory Manager will call MoreMasters, creat-

ing another block of master pointers.
The zcbFree field contains the total number of free bytes in the heap (zcb stands

for zone count of bytes). It’s interesting to note that you probably can’t allocate an

object this big, since objects must consist of consecutive bytes, and this number is
the total of all the free bytes.

The gzProc field is a pointer to our old friend, the grow zone function. The
ROM call SetGrowZone lets you put the address of your application’s grow zone
function into this field.

63

64

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

The moreMast field tells the Memory Manager how many master pointers to
allocate at once when someone calls MoreMasters. This is set to 64 for application
heap zones. If you set it to another value and then call MoreMasters, the new
master pointer block will have moreMast master pointers in it. If you do this, you

should be sure to change it back to 64 after you make your call, since the system will
call MoreMasters itself if it ever runs out of master pointers.
The last field in the record, heapData, is very interesting. It’s only declared as
an integer, but it actually represents the entire heap! Here’s the scoop: this record
declaration exists mainly to allow high-level language programmers access to the
fields of the heap zone header; that is, everything in the record except the heap-

Data field. The heapData field is simply the first two bytes of the heap’s data (the

stuff beyond the header). Since the data is accessed only in assembly language by
the Memory Manager, it doesn’t need a record declaration.

While we're talking about hard core stuff like the structure of heap zone headers, it’s important to remember what it’s useful for. When you're debugging your
programs and you need to watch the heap’s behavior, it’s handy to know exactly
what's going on. However, if you can help it, you should never make your programs
rely on intimate details of the Macintosh operating system like this. That will give you

a good shot at staying compatible as Apple evolves the Macintosh architecture.
It’s also important to note that the Memory Manager has recently been rewritten to accommodate 32-bit addresses, rather than the 24 bits of address that the
original Macintosh could handle. This change has required new versions of many

of the Memory Manager data structures (although not the heap zone header,
which we just discussed), and Apple hasn’t documented these new versions yet.
Isn’t that mean? Not really. Although Apple has not yet provided the intimate

details on things like master pointers, debuggers like MacsBug know about the
changes, so they’ll still tell you what’s going on.

Despite that fact, it’s still interesting to study the format of the Memory Manager’s data structures in classic (24-bit addressing) heap zones. We'll spend some
time now going over the 24-bit versions of these structures, which are still used on
millions of 32-bit-incapable Macintosh computers. The 32-bit formats are left for
you to sleuth out.

Heap block header
Each block in the heap starts with a block header, which tells some things about the

block, including which of the three types it is. Following the block header are the
contents bytes of the block. This is where an object's actual data is kept. Finally, a

block may have unused bytes at the end.

Chapter3

More about Heaps and Fragmentation

Why unused bytes?

There are two reasons for unused bytes. One reason is
that the Memory Manager will allocate blocks only with even sizes. If a

Manager will allocate 74 bytes, with one unused byte at the end. The block
maintains both a physical size and a logical size. This block’s physical size is
74 bytes; thatis, it actually occupies 74 bytes in memory. But its logical size is
73 bytes. That's what the program asked for, and that’s all it can count on.

The second reason for unused bytesis that the Memory Manager will

_

allocate a minimum of 12 bytes toany block, including free blocks. This means

that a memory request for 4 bytes will resultin a 12-byte object, though its
logical size will be 4 bytes. Also, if anymemoryallocation would leave a free —
block smaller than 12 bytes, the free spaceis just tacked onto the end of the
allocated block. For example, if the heap contained a 624-byte “gap” between
two nonrelocatable objects, and a new, 620-byte object wasbeing createdin

the gap, the Memory Manager would make the new obj ect’s physical size 624
bytes, since it could not leave a 4-byte free block remaining.

The block header is defined and maintained by the Memory Manager, and

your application will probably never delve into its contents. As with heap zone
headers, the main reason for studying block headers is for debugging. The contents
of a block are just plain bytes to the Memory Manager. Your application may

interpret a particular heap object as a page of text, a bitmap of the solar system, or
one title in your compact disc collection, but that’s all irrelevant to the Memory
Manager. It deals with the object simply as a chunk of bytes.

Now let's take a look at the structure of a block header (just what you've been
waiting for, I’m sure). As we said earlier, every heap block begins with a block header,

which tells some things about the block. Block headers are always 8 bytes long. The
structure of a block header is shown in Figure 3-6, and we’ll discuss the pieces. This
kind of information is really presented just for your amusement. It’s not even that

interesting when you're debugging, since the debugger will tell you about the heap
block contents in a more legible, symbolic way (an F to indicate a free block, for

example). Also, relying on this stuff to be in the heap block header is a good way to
make your programs not work with 32-bit systems, which is a very bad idea.
The first four bits (which form the first hexadecimal digit) of the block header
tell us a fundamental fact about the block: whether it’s relocatable, nonrelocatable,
or free. Relocatable blocks have a hex 8 in this position (binary 1000), nonrelocatables have $4 (binary 0100), and free blocks are marked with a $0 (binary 0000).
The next four bits give the number of unused bytes in the block. This can also be
thought of as the difference between the block’s physical size and its logical size.

65

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

|

|

I

I

Relocatable block: relative handle

Physical block size

nonrelocatable block: address of zone

free block: (unused)

Heap block header (8 bytes)

Relocatable

Non-

Size correction

relocatable

Both are zero if
free block

Figure 3-6.

Physical size minus logical size
Tag byte

Heap block header

Note that this means that there can never be more than 15 (binary 1111) unused
bytes in a block. This field is called the size correction of the block.

The four bits that tell the type of the block and the four size correction bits
together are called the block's tag byte. This is always the first byte of the block

header.

The next three bytes in the block header give the physical size of the block in
bytes. This size includes the size of the header itself. Since there are three bytes in

this field, the physical size of a heap block in a 24-bit heap can be as large as $FFFFFF
(the largest number you can squeeze into three bytes), or 16,777,215 bytes, more

commonly known as 16 megabytes. Once upona time, not too long ago, folks in the
Macintosh world would have chuckled at this number as a limitation. Now, multiple megabyte machines are common, and 16 megabytes doesn’t seem as mindboggling as it once did—still pretty awesome, though. Of course, Macintosh computers with 32-bit addressing can handle hundreds of megabytes or more. The
exact amount varies depending on the particular model.

The final four bytes of the block header differ depending on the type of the
block. If the blockis nonrelocatable, this field contains the address of the beginning

of the heap zone. If the block is relocatable, this field contains (ina special format)

the address of the block’s master pointer.

Chapter3

Relativity invitation.

More about Heaps and Fragmentation

The address of the block’s master pointer is stored in

the block header as a relative offset from the beginning of the heap zone. This
formis called a relative handle. In other words, you obtain the actual address

of the master pointer by adding the relative handle to the address of the
beginning of the heap zone. Adding addressesis something computers, not
humans, are good at, so most debuggers that display block headers show you

the real (absolute) address of the master point in this field instead of this
relative handle business.

|

Since debuggers decode relative handles into addresses for you, you

most likely will never.-have to deal directly with them yourself, even when
debugging. For this reason, relative handles are officially recognized as
Macintosh trivia: very few people know about them, and you can now consider yourself one ofthe elite.

If the block is free, the last four bytes of the block header contain garbage.
Officially, the last four bytes are unused for free blocks.
The Memory Manager uses the block header to keep information about the

block up to date. When a new block is allocated, the Memory Manager will fill in the
fields of the block header. If the block is made larger or smaller with SetHandleSize

or SetPtrSize, the block header is adjusted accordingly.

Immediately following the eight-byte block header is the block’s data—what
we defined earlier as the contents bytes. When you create the block by calling
NewHandle or NewPtr, the address (the handle or pointer) that’s returned to you
is the address of the contents, not the header. This is what you want, of course: if
you've allocated 250 bytes to keep your database record, you don’t want to go
storing into the block header. The number that you specify in the

NewHandle or

NewPtr call is the logical size of the block.

Master pointers
Another very important kind of data structure in the heap is the master pointer, the

address of a relocatable block. A master pointer is more than simply an address,
however. Since it’s created and maintained by the Memory Manager, it has a very

well defined form and predictable behavior, both of which are extremely useful to
know when you're debugging.

Remember that master pointers are not relocatable, since they anchor relocatable blocks. Also, since master pointers are created by the Memory Manager, they
reside in the heap. Since heap blocks have a minimum size of 12 bytes and master

pointers really only need four bytes, it would seem like a massive waste of memory
to allocate a new nonrelocatable heap block for each master pointer.

67

68

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

To avoid wasting space this way, master pointers travel in herds called master
pointer blocks. As we discussed earlier, the number of master pointers in a master

pointer block is specified by the moreMast field in the heap zone header, and that
number is usually 64. When a program calls MoreMasters, a new block of master
pointers is allocated.

When your application starts up, your heap zone contains exactly one master
pointer block. How many do you need? Consider this: every relocatable block that
might be allocated by your application would need a master pointer. If at any point

in your application’s life the Memory Manager runs out of available master pointers, it will call MoreMasters itself, creating a new nonrelocatable block possibly
right in the middle of your carefully unfragmented heap! How can you prevent
this disaster? Easily. Just call MoreMasters yourself in your application’s initial
housekeeping.
You should actually call MoreMasters several times in your initialization code.

Exactly how many times to call it depends on the number of relocatable blocks used
by your application. A good minimum is three times, but you should determine an

optimum number for your application by observing your heap zone’s behavior, as
we
ll do in Chapter 7.
When in doubt, always allocate more master pointer blocks than you think

you'll need. A master pointer block costs you 264 bytes of heap space (64 master
pointers at 4 bytes each, plus 8 bytes for the block header). A master pointer block
created at a random time later in your application’s life will likely cost you much

more by fragmenting your heap and cutting your available heap space into pieces.
Don’t be shy about calling MoreMasters.

The actual structure of a master pointer is something that you'll rarely need to
know, since most debuggers will automatically interpret master pointers for you. A
master pointer is another data structure that only a ROM junkie, a debugger, or the

Memory Manager could love. A diagram of its structure is shown in Figure 3-7. As

you'd expect, the master pointer provides the address of the relocatable block, but
it also tells us a few more important facts about the block. Since the address of the
block is limited to three bytes (the 16-megabyte address range), the high byte of the
master pointer is used for this extra information.

The first bit of the master pointer tells whether the relocatable block is locked or
not. If it is locked, this bit is a 1. The next bit specifies whether the block is currently

marked purgeable; it’s a 1 if it is. The third bit indicates if the relocatable block it
points to is a resource; if so, it’s

a1. The remaining five bits in this byte are reserved.

The first eight bits of the master pointer are called the flags byte.
Each of the three defined bits in the flags byte has a numerical value when the

flags byte is expressed as a hexadecimal digit. The lock bit has the value $80, the
purgeable bit is worth $40, and the resource bit adds $20. In other words, if a master
pointer begins with $80, we know that it points to a locked block; if it begins with

$A0, the block is a locked, nonpurgeable resource ($80 + $20 = $A0).

Chapter3

|

More about Heaps and Fragmentation

Address of block's contents

Master pointer (4 bytes)

Locked

Purgeable

Resource

|

|

<——— Unused ——>

Flags byte
Figure 3-7.

Master pointer

The last three bytes of the master pointer are the pointer to the block’s data. Since
heap blocks must always have an even number of bytes, this address is always even.
On systems with 32-bit addressing, the whole master pointer is used as the
address of the heap block, of course. The information that was kept in the flags byte
is still around, but it’s off somewhere else.

Just setting bits.

Seeing how the Memory Manager keeps track of whether

a block is locked or purgeable takes a lot of the mystery out of the HLock/
HUnlock and HPurge/HNoPurge calls. In fact, they just dereference the han-

dle passed to them and set or clear the appropriate bit for 24-bit heaps. When
you're doing these operations, though, you should definitely not just go and
set or clear the bits yourself—please use the ROM calls. This will ensure that
your application is compatible with Memory Managers that use 32-bit

addressing and have a different master pointer structure.

Using the Memory Manager
The Memory Manager provides over forty routines, but most programs will be able

to get by with only a handful of the most important ones. Here’s a brief list of the
calls that you’re most likely to use.

69

70

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

FUNCTION NewHandle

(logicalSize:

Size)

:

Handle;

This is probably the single most commonly used Memory Manager call. As
we’ ve already seen, NewHandle creates a new relocatable block in the heap and
returns a handle to that block. You should use it to create data blocks dynamically.
FUNCTION NewPtr

(logicalSize:

Size)

:

Ptr;

This call creates a new nonrelocatable block in the heap. Use it carefully and
rarely since nonrelocatable blocks can fragment the heap and prevent full utilization of free heap space.
PROCEDURE

DisposHandle

(h:

Handle);

Use this call to get rid of a relocatable block after you no longer need it.

Warning.

Watch out! After calling DisposHandle, any handles to the

deceased heap block are now invalid. The handles are not changed—they still
point to master pointers. Also, unused master pointers are keptina

linked list,

each one pointing at the next unused one. So, the master pointer that these

now invalid handles point to still points to something. Not a relocatable block
any more, but another master pointer!

_ This means that if you call DisposHandle twice on the same handle, you

horrible and confusing death whenit attempts to create another relocatable

block. There’s one weird crash.in which you get a system error box with two

tiny diskicons drawnin the upper left corner of the screen. This problem can

usually be traced to disposing the same relocatable block twice. Don’t call

DisposHandle on
o an already disposed block.

PROCEDURE

DisposPtr

(p:

Ptr);

This call frees up a previously allocated nonrelocatable block in the heap.
PROCEDURE

MoreMasters;

This procedure allocates a block of master pointers, usually 64 of them, getting

the actual number from the moreMast field of the heap zone header. Call this
several (or many) times at the beginning of your application to avoid fragmentation.

Chapter3

PROCEDURE

More about Heaps and Fragmentation

MaxApplZone;

Calling this routine causes the heap to be “grown” to its maximum size without
relocating or purging any blocks. Call this once at the beginning of your application
to prevent unnecessary purging.
PROCEDURE

BlockMove(sourcePtr, destPtr:

Ptr;

byteCount:

Size);

This routine is a fast, well-tested, easy way to move bytes around in memory.
You can use it to move bytes either up or down, and the source and destination
ranges may overlap. This is the routine that the Memory Manager itself uses to

relocate heap blocks.
There are a lot more Memory Manager calls, and you'll probably use some of
them in your applications, but these provide the functionality that you'll need
almost every time you sit down to write code.

Reducing fragmentation
The key to making your applications run effectively in limited-memory environments (and what environment isn’t limited memory?) is understanding how your
memory is being used and maximizing its availability. On a Macintosh, heap blocks

must consist of continuous bytes, and nonrelocatable blocks can fragment these
runs of continuous bytes, as we've seen. So reducing fragmentation in your heap
involves careful management of nonrelocatable blocks.

There are two common kinds of nonrelocatable blocks. The first kind is the
master pointer block, which we've already discussed. Master pointer blocks must
be nonrelocatable. As we've said, the best way to avoid having master pointer

blocks fragment your heap is to call MoreMasters an appropriate number of times

at the beginning of your application.
The other common class of nonrelocatable blocks consists of things built on the
QuickDraw data structure called a GrafPort. A GrafPort is a drawing environment
for QuickDraw operations. For example, a GrafPort holds the font to be used when

text is drawn, or the size, shape, and pattern of the pen to be used when graphics
are drawn, and the rectangle in which they'll be displayed.
Almost every QuickDraw call operates on the “current,” or default, GrafPort,
and these calls aren’t prepared to deal with GrafPort as relocatable blocks. Since
QuickDraw always gets to a GrafPort via a pointer, not a handle, GrafPorts are

nonrelocatable if they’re in the heap (they can also be allocated on the stack).
The GrafPort is an extremely important data structure for the entire Macintosh

user interface. Two other structures are built on it, and each of them must be
nonrelocatable, too. The first one is the window record. Each window has a window record, and the window record contains a GrafPort, as well as some other stuff,

such as information about the window’s title and about the window behind it on

71

72

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

the screen. Since the first thing in the window record is a Grafport, a window
record is fundamentally a GrafPort with some extra fields on the end, and it also is
nonrelocatable.

The second data structure built on a GrafPort is the dialog record. A dialog
record is a superset of a window record; that is, it consists of a window record,
followed by additional fields, including information about the list of items in the
dialog, the default button number, and more. Once again, the key here is that the
first thing in the record is a GrafPort. This means that all dialog records, like
GrafPorts and window records, must be either nonrelocatable blocks or stack
objects. Figure 3-8 summarizes these common kinds of nonrelocatable blocks.
Calling MoreMasters will cure the problem of fragmentation due to master
pointer blocks, but as your application runs, you'll create window and dialog
records. How do you ensure that these records don’t cause fragmentation of your
heap space?

There are several different strategies you can use, some of them obvious and
some not so obvious. The most obvious is simply to allocate window records and

dialog records on the stack. This is very easy to do. The calls that create new
windows and dialogs give the caller the option of making the new record a heap or

stack object. For many applications, this method works fine. The only drawback is
that window records will usually have to be declared as global variables, since they
are in use most of the time. This means that if your application can show a maximum of three windows, for example, you will have to allocate three global window

records, at a cost of 154 bytes per window record. Since dialog records usually exist
only for a brief, well-defined period of time, you can often allocate them as local
stack variables.

This technique works for some applications, but a couple of complications can
spoil things. One is the problem of window records for desk accessories. If a desk
accessory allocates its window on the heap, it can cause unexpected fragmentation.
The best thing you can do to prevent fragmentation caused by a desk accessory is
to have a heap free of locked relocatables and fragmentation.

Figure 3-8.

Common nonrelocatable blocks

Object

Comment

Location

GrafPort

QuickDraw drawing environment

Heap or stack

WindowRecord

Contains a GrafPort, so it must be nonrelocatable

Heap or stack

DialogRecord

Contains a WindowRecord, so it must be nonrelocatable

Heap or stack

Master pointer block

Cannot move, since master pointers “anchor” relocatables

Heap

Chapter3

Your friend MultiFinder.

More about Heaps and Fragmentation

When you're running under MultiFinder, desk

accessories operate in their ownlayer,
with their own application heap zone
(one heap for all the desk accessories). This effectively gets rid of many of the

problems caused by desk accessoriespestering your application. When you're

using System 7, things are even more luxurious, as each desk accessory lives
in its own partition.

~

aie

|

|

The other problem arises if your application is capable of opening a large

number of windows. If you allow the user to open, say, up to 25 windows, or maybe
even an unlimited number of windows, you can’t just allocate a global window
record on the stack for every window you might open!
How can you avoid fragmentation when lots of windows are opened? In

general, you should make sure that the only time you create windows (or any other
nonrelocatable heap blocks) is from your application’s main segment. We'll talk
more about this subject later.

In addition to nonrelocatable blocks, remember that locked relocatables can
fragment your heap. A relocatable block becomes locked when you call HLock on
it, and it stays that way until you call HUnlock on it. While it’s locked, it’s fragmenting your heap, and if any new blocks are created while it’s locked, the newly

created block can be only as large as the longest continuous run of bytes between
immobile blocks. As long as no new blocks are allocated while the block is locked,
locking it doesn’t hurt you. So the rule is this: you can call HLock, if necessary, to

ensure that a relocatable block won’t move for a period of time; make sure that you
don’t allocate any new heap blocks while it’s locked. Before calling HLock, you

should call MoveHHiona block so that it won't fragment the heap while it’s locked.
Sometimes the system will HLock blocks on its own, without you telling it to do
so. This may seem like a real rude thing to do, but actually it’s very necessary. The

system locks resources that consist of executable code while they’re being executed. This includes CODE, PACK, MDEF, CDEF, WDEF, DRVR, and other
resources that are made up of code. For example, your application’s segments are
CODE resources. Whena routine in one of your segments is executing, the system
automatically calls HLock on your segment. The same thing happens for the other
types of code-filled resources when they're executing.
If you're familiar with assembly language, and you think about it, you'll see
why locking executing code is absolutely necessary. The 68000 keeps track of which
instruction it’s executing by using a special register called the program counter.

The program counter simply contains the address of the next instruction to be
executed. Imagine what would happen if the running code called a Memory Man-

ager routine that caused some heap blocks to move, including the code itself. When
the 68000 tried to return to where the program used to be, it would start running

undefined bytes. To prevent this disastrous situation, code is automatically locked
by the system before it’s executed.

73

74.

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

The most obvious kind of executing code is your application’s CODE seg-

ments, but remember that there are lots of other little pieces of code hanging
around in the Macintosh at all times, like MDEFs, CDEFs, and others (the most
common ones are listed in Figure 3-9). These pieces of code are also locked by the

system before they’re executed and unlocked by the system after they’re done
executing. Note that the system does not automatically unlock CODE resources for

you. We'll discuss this important fact shortly.

Figure 3-9.

Some common resource types that contain code

Resource type

Contents

CDEF

Control definition function, used to draw controls

CODE

Application’s code, one resource for each segment

DRVR

Driver or desk accessory

FKEY

Function key, maps < Command> - < Shift > -number

INIT

Resource loaded and executed at system startup

LDEF

List definition function, used by List Manager to draw lists

MDEF

Menu definition procedure, used to draw menus

PACK

Package, i.e. Standard File, SANE, Disk Initialization, etc.

PDEF

Printer driver code

WDEF

Window definition function

When resources like the ones listed in Figure 3-9 are in use and locked, it’s

usually because you made a ROM call in your application. For example, when you

call MenuSelect, on an unusual custom menu defined by a menu definition function that’s not in ROM, the menu’s MDEF resource will be locked while the Menu-

Select code uses it to draw the menus. When it’s done drawing the menus, the
MDEF will be unlocked. In other words, the MDEF will be unlocked when your

application calls MenuSelect, the system will lock it, and then unlock it before it
ever returns back to the application from the MenuSelect call. This means that
you
ll never have to worry about the MDEF being locked over some period of your

application’s time.
This fast lock/unlock by the system is true of all the resource types listed in
Figure 3-9 except CODE. They will be locked and unlocked during some ROM calls,
but will always be unlocked when the ROM calls return. You don’t have to worry

about them fragmenting the heap.

Segmenting your application
As mentioned earlier, the system doesn’t unlock CODE resources for you automat-

ically. This is because there’s no easy way for the system to tell when a CODE

Chapter3

More about Heaps and Fragmentation

segment is finished executing, as it can when a ROM routine calls a resource listed
in Figure 3-9. So the vital job of unlocking CODE segments is left up to you. Don’t
worry, it’s easy, and we'll talk about it now.
Most Macintosh applications have a central core in which the application is
waiting for the user to do something: type, click on something, select a menu item,
and so on. This is called the main event loop. Based on what the user does, the

application branches off into other parts of the program: a certain menu selection
may cause a dialog to come up; another one may cause a new window to be created

or make the document print out.
An application’s external appearance usually corresponds somewhat to its
internal structure. There’s usually a main loop that checks what the user is doing by

calling WaitNextEvent and performs other periodic housekeeping tasks, like calling TEIdle to keep the insertion point blinking in a TextEdit record. When the main

loop reveals that the user has chosen a certain menu item, the program will branch
off to a different function that will handle the menu item. When it has been taken

care of, control will return to the main loop.
When you're writing a Macintosh application, there’s usually not enough
memory to keep your entire application and all your data around. The easiest way

to get past this dilemma is to break up your application into segments, with each
segment being a separately loadable CODE resource. As I mentioned in Chapter 1,

most development systems have some kind of directive for letting you specify
segments.

How do you determine how your routines should be collected together into

segments? Remember that the Macintosh system will load the entire segment into
memory when you need to use any routine in that segment. This should give you

a clue as to how to organize your application: put related routines together. If a
certain menu item causes five different functions to be invoked, one after the other,
you should probably put all five of them into the same segment. If you put them in
different segments, the user may have to sit there while each of the segments is
loaded from disk, spending the waiting time cursing at how slow the Macintosh
and your application are.
You'll probably have routines that are so important that they’re called on by
many different parts of your application. There’s a good place for these: the main

segment. Remember that one piece of your application, CODE resource 1, is loaded
when your application starts up, stays loaded until the application ends, and is
always locked. This is the main segment. It’s a real good place for commonly called
utility routines, like special formatting or calculation routines. They’re guaranteed
always to be in memory, so you don’t have to worry about a hit on the disk; but the
memory that they use isn’t available for anything else, since the main segment stays
around forever. Don’t put huge routines in the main segment unless you use them

constantly; on the other hand, if you’ve got a fairly small routine that has to be
loaded from disk a lot, putting it in the main segment will probably be a big win.

79

76

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

Figuring out how to collect your routines into segments is a process that will
continue throughout the development of your application. As you're debugging

and optimizing, you'll see where your segments need tuning and you'll move
routines from one segment to another.

Unloading your segments
Once you've got your segmenting figured out, the hard part is over. All you have

to do then is make sure that you unlock your segments correctly. This is accomplished with the UnloadSeg call. UnloadSeg actually unlocks a CODE resource and

makes it purgeable. Although some application writers take great pains to unload
segments only when they’re sure that the segments will no longer be needed,
there’s a pretty efficient and much simpler way to do it that most applications use.
This is simply to call UnloadSeg for all your segments every time through the main
event loop.

Startup segment.

If you've puta

lot of initialization code that gets executed

only when theapplication starts up into a single segment, you don’t have to
waste time unloading it with UnloadSeg every timethrough #
the main event

loop. Just unloading it once willdo.

=

This works best if your application is structured along the lines we mentioned

earlier; that is, the main event loop acts as a central dispatcher that calls routines in

the other segments, and when those routines are done, control returns to the main
event loop.

What happens if you call UnloadSeg on a segment and then call a routine in

that segment? That’s OK; UnloadSeg just makes the segment purgeable, it doesn’t
cause it to be purged. So, when the routine in the segment is called, the segment is

still in memory and doesn’t have to be loaded from disk. What if the segment is

already unloaded or has never been loaded? That's all right, too. The operating
system is smart enough to do nothing if you call UnloadSeg on an already

unloaded segment.

By the way, there is also a LoadSeg call, but very few applications ever call it
directly. LoadSeg is called implicitly by the system whenever your program calls a
routine in another segment. LoadSeg makes sure that the segment is in memory

and then locks it.

Chapter3

When not to call UnloadSeg.

More about Heaps and Fragmentation

Is there any time that calling UnloadSeg can

get you into trouble? Yes, if one segment calls another and the second seg-

ment unloads the first.

Let's say you have an application in which a routine in segment 10 calls a
routine in segment 99. Then, in segment 99, you decide it’s a good idea to call

UnloadSeg on segment 10, just to free up its memory. Look out! When the
segment 10 routine called segment 99, it left a return address on the stack so

that the program would return to the right place in segment 10. By unloading
segment 10, you've made it relocatable. If it moves, the return address is no

longer valid (see Figure 3-10). So don’t call UnloadSeg on segments that called
you. The best rule is simply to put all your UnloadSeg calls in the main segment.

You can achieve very good segment management by just calling UnloadSeg on
every segment every time through your main event loop. Although this may seem

kind of sloppy, UnloadSeg really does so little that most applications are satisfied
just to unload every segment in the main event loop. If you have zillions of segments, or you want to be a little cleaner, you can attempt to determine just when

segments need to be unloaded. Be careful, though—pay attention to the ‘“When

not to call UnloadSeg” information that we just talked about.
Congratulations! If you’ve absorbed the information in the last two chapters,
you now know more about Macintosh memory management than most of the

world’s Macintosh programmers. As always, the more you know about what's
really going on, the better you can make your application.

Stack
Return

address

164809

Stack
» Currently
a eaning
i
eg

164822

Heap
~ Currently
“running oe

Segment
—_—-?P| 10
Relocated

164822:

1

calls routine in segment 99;
segment 99 calls UnloadSeg
on segment 10.
Figure 3-10.

Bad use of UnloadSeg

164822: | Unknown |

Segment 10 is relocated;
return address is
invalid.

a7

pe

78

PART ONE

HOW IT ALL WORKS

Things to remember
e Some blocks must be locked at certain times. The most important of these
are your application’s code segments, which are locked while they're

executing.

|

-

e By segmenting your application and calling UnloadSeg on each segment
every time through the main event loop, you can free up memory.

e By trying to keep your memory allocations in the main event loop, when all
your segments are unlocked, you can help maximize your available heap

space.

|

|

e You should use MoveHHi before HLocking objects; this will move them to

the top of the heap, where they won't be in the way.

PA
R T

T

W

O

Debugging
CHAPTER 4

Debugging Macintosh Software

CHAPTER 5

Examining Compiled Code

CHAPTER 6

More about Compiled Code

CHAPTER 7

Real Live Debugging

I could write a book, and this book
would be thick enough to stun an ox.
—Laurie Anderson, Let

X=X

79

C

H

A

P

T

E

R

4

Debugging Macintosh Software
In this chapter, we'll talk about debugging in general, and about specific things you
have to do when you're debugging Macintosh applications. We’ll also go over

various tools that you can use to debug your software.
We'll discuss the reasons why system errors on the Macintosh don’t give youa
lot of information. We'll talk about questions that you have to ask while debugging.
The answers to these questions will help you find out exactly what’s gone wrong so
that you can fix it.

Bugs
Newly written programs usually have bugs. Even those who try to make their
programs right the first time usually spend a great deal of time debugging, and
many projects wind up with more debugging time than initial programming time.

The programming and debugging phases often become so tightly coupled that
they flow quickly into each other, especially in light of a project’s impending
deadline. Your computer science professor may have outlined strict, methodical

steps for design, “coding” (a word that sounds like translating messages with a
secret decoder ring), and debugging, but reality is often a lot hairier than that. Most
projects involve a reasonable amount of design work, but frequently the best way
to compare various design alternatives is to create a few of them on the computer
and test them for power and functionality.
No matter how well designed or well written a program is, it will have to be

debugged. In fact, even if the program is working, you want to improve its performance by optimizing the program, a process that’s much the same as debugging.

81

82

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Computer programs are complex things that truly have a life of their own. You
create them, but then you turn them loose to do their work, kind of like children.
You'll find that software is usually easier to debug than kids are, because it is
absolutely predictable. If your program is doing something wrong, you can track
down exactly what’s happening and why and then fix the problem. It’s not always
easy, but it can be done.

Of course, sometimes you'll discover that the problem is not in your program,
but in the Macintosh ROM or in the compiler you’re using or in someone else’s
software, such as a desk accessory that your application brought up. If this is the

case, you get to participate in the fascinating game of workarounds, or how to get
your program to avoid somebody else’s problem. It’s all part of the fun. Usually,
though, you find out that it’s your bug.

Kinds
of bugs
There are two kinds of behavior you'll have to fix. The first occurs when the

program dies in a hard and fast (and sometimes spectacular) way; for example, the
screen is filled with garbage, the computer restarts, funny sounds start to come out

of the speaker, or a bomb (system error) dialog appears. This is called a crash. The
second kind of problem is more subtle: the program isn’t working properly, but it
doesn’t have the heart to crash. It just keeps going, not doing the right thing.
In general, bugs of the second kind are traditional logical errors in your programming, the kind programmers have been making ever since long before they

invented FORTRAN. Often, the best way to fix these bugs is the conventional
computer science way: by reading through your source code as if you were a very,
very slow computer and determining what you did wrong.
For the Macintosh crash, however, this method isn’t always good enough. This

is because of the large amount of interplay between your software and someone
else’s: the ROM and the other system software. The communication of errors from

the system to your application is not very sophisticated. Also, the system routines
tend to give the application programmera lot of credit—credit to pass it reasonable
parameters, for example. When the parameters are unreasonable, crashes can happen. For crashes, other kinds of debugging are needed, and that’s the basis for most

of the material in this part of the book.

Error checking for the ROM.

Although there’s not much

error checking on

parameters to ROM routines, there’s a handy tool, called Discipline, that

checks ROM call parameters for reasonableness. This utility is available from
APDA (call 800-282-2732 to order).

Chapter4

Debugging Macintosh Software

One of the most important things to know about debugging is this:

Fact.

A system error is the result of the execution of a single 68000

instruction.

7

|

Understanding this is the first step to fixing your program. It means that a system

error is not some unapproachable random behavior, but in fact occurs for specific,
well-defined reasons. To fix your program, you'll learn the reasons for the crash.
Does it sound easy? Well, it probably shouldn’t sound too easy. The typical

Macintosh programmer spendsa lot of time debugging, and there are problems that
can leave you totally exasperated before you solve them. But remember that there

really is a reason for whatever bizarre behavior is plaguing your poor program, and
that if you look long and hard enough (and get enough help) you'll find it. Remember that cheerful thought, and maybe it will keep you going on those long nights.

Understanding what's going on inside the Macintosh when your application is
running is essential. The more you know, the more likely it is that you'll be able to
fix and enhance your application. The more areas of mystery that you encounter
without solving them, the better the chance the program will one day exhibit a bug
that will leave you wondering what in the world is happening.

Aside from just making it work, a thorough knowledge of what your application is doing will help you in the future when the inevitable revision takes place. If

you really know what your code is doing, you'll have a much better shot at adding
features or improving performance in the future.

Why system errors don’t tell you very much
Often your first indication that something’s gone wrong is the appearance of the

good ol’ bomb box, which is more formally known as a system error. The system
error is accompanied by a number. You might think that this would tell you a lot
about the problem. Unfortunately, it tells you virtually nothing other than that
something bad has happened.
Why can’t we learn more from system errors? Here’s a rather dramatic but

effective metaphor. Imagine that you’re driving down a road and you see a car

smashed into a tree, burning. What happened? Was the road slippery? Was the
driver drunk? Did the brakes fail? Did the driver swerve to avoid hitting a squirrel?
You can’t tell. The crash and the fire have destroyed much of the evidence. To
know what really happened, you’d have to have been there as the accident
occurred. If you could watch it re-created, in slow motion, you might be able to see
the causes, and if you were an expert, you might be able to learn what happened.
Software on the Macintosh is a lot like that. Thousands of things can go wrong:

an uninitialized variable can be used as if it were valid; there can be a relocatable

83

84

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

block that is released, but still referred to by leftover handles; or a program can
neglect to check an error code, just to name a few.
Whatever the cause, the Macintosh, like the car in our metaphor, loses control
and hits the tree. It’s important to realize that there’s no guarantee that the cause

led directly to the problem; for example, the car’s brakes may have been out for
some time before the fateful tree was encountered. In the same way, the program

may do its bad thing, like forgetting to check an error code, then run along for a

while, everything apparently OK, until it does something that causes a system error.
Whatever the problem, it usually results in a system error. These occur when a
variety of things happen. Each cause of a system error is discussed in this chapter.

The most important thing to remember is that a system error simply tells you
that something has gone wrong, and the error number is merely a clue to learn
what it was that happened. Getting a system error is the beginning of your search
to find the problem, not the end.
Some errors are easily repeated. You know that if you followa list of instructions the program will crash every time. These kinds of crashes are the program-

mer’s friend. If you know it will crash every time, you can rerun the program and
watch very carefully, in slow motion, when the error occurs.

Much tougher is an error that seems to occur at random. You've seen it happen,
but you can’t seem to come up with a script to repeat the error. These problems are
usually much tougher to find, since it’s hard to look back after a crash and learn
much about it.

The art of debugging
Debugging is one of those problem-solving things that humans do really well and
computers are not so good at. Debugging involves rules, logic, hunches, intuition,

source listings, experience, tedium, and many caffeine-enriched beverages. In the
typical debugging process, the programmer runs the application, uses special programs (debuggers) to observe and modify the application’s behavior, and gener-

ally tries to figure out what's going on inside the box. It also often involves frustration, blind alleys, cursing of debuggers, and moments of supreme triumph as you

finally figure out what's wrong.
In this part of the book, we'll talk about some rules and suggestions for debug-

ging your code. As you start doing more debugging, you'll learn shortcuts, techniques, and tricks that help you along, and very soon the idea of looking at a list of

“debugging rules” will be alien to you—knowing what to do will be automatic.
Also, since debugging is a problem-solving experience, there are lots of dif-

ferent ways to attack any situation. There’s usually no way of knowing which one
is best for a given situation, so you'll develop your favorites. In this chapter we'll

discuss the most popular techniques.

Chapter4

Debugging Macintosh Software

One of the things that makes debugging difficult is that every problem is a little
bit different. As you come across more and more situations, you'll figure out strange

and wonderful new ways to debug your programs.

High-level language programmers. . Most Macintosh applications are written in high-level languages, but the most effective Macintosh debugging is

done at the assembly language level. This.is because debugging an applica-

tion involves watching the application work. The more sophisticated the

debugger gets, the more memory it takes and the more it intrudes on the
application. Thisis sort of an example of the Heisenberg Uncertainty Prin-

ciple: low-level debuggers that let you observe an application’s object code

provide the least disturbance to the application.
This doesn't mean that you have to be an assembly language program-

mer to write or debug a Macintosh application. However, an effective highlevel Macintosh programmer can alsoread and follow assembly language.

The ability to write assembly language iis handy, butis not really required.

You might call this a “read-only” knowledge of assembly language.
Reading assembly language versus writingit is kind of like being able to
understand a spoken language, but notbeing able to speak it perfectly your-

self. You might be able to listen to. someone speakin, say, Spanish or SerboCroatian and understand what's beingsaid, but when you try to speak, you

goof up the grammar a bit. You’re better off if you can speak it, too, but
:

listening to itis a separate skill.

There are several different methods of debugging, but they all use the same

basic principles. The fundamental principle, which we’ve already discussed, is
knowing exactly what your application is doing. As we said earlier, most noncrashing bugs can be located and fixed just by working with the source, but you can use
the techniques of watching your application run to debug those problems, too.

sometimes, using an object code debugger to figure out that a loop that went from
1 to 10 should have gone from 0 to 9 is overkill, but it will work.

Debugging questions
Debugging is an information-gathering process. While you're debugging, you'll
answer several important questions, like these:
e

Where did the program crash?

e

What specifically caused the crash?

86

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

¢

What assembly language instruction was the last one executed before the crash?

e

What caused the offending instruction to be executed?
Fixing your bugs involves answering each of these questions. To find the

answers, you'll use lots of different techniques to gather information. Each piece of

information that you learn is a clue to your bug. As you gather clues, you'll start to
form theories about your bugs: what they might be, where they might be located.
As you think about these theories, you can do more with the debugger to test them,

and you'll get still more clues. Eventually, if you do your work right, the clues will
lead you to the problem.
Let's take a look at each of the questions listed and discuss how you might find
the answers.

Where did the program crash?
The first step in understanding what's happening to your application is finding out
where the program was when it crashed. This means determining the last instruction it executed before the crash happened.
When the Macintosh does anything, including crashing a program, it does so

because of instructions being executed by the microprocessor. For example, when
the Macintosh puts up the system error bomb, a routine called SysError in the
system Error Handler section of the ROM has been called. Why was this routine

called? Either a program or subroutine determined that an error condition existed,
and it called SysError, or a microprocessor exception, such as an address error,
occurred. We'll talk a lot about exceptions later in this chapter.
What routine would do a terrible thing like calling SysError? Usually, it’s a

ROM routine that your application called. For example, when your application
calls the Standard File package, the system tries to find the resource that holds
Standard File (that’s PACK 3) and load it (so far, PACK 3 hasn’t made its way into

ROM). If it can’t find PACK 3, it’s in very serious trouble. What can the system do?

Can it put up an alert that says “Can’t find PACK 3’? Well, it could, but most users
wouldn't have any idea what was going on.
Since there’s really nothing the average user can do to recover from this unlikely
situation, the Macintosh puts up a system error when it can’t find the Standard File

package, or any other package it needs (in this case, it’s system error 20).

More on SysError.

SysError takes one parameter, which is the error num-

ber to report. In the preceding example, SysError is called with a parameter of
20, which means that PACK resource number 3 couldn’t be found. SysError is
documented extensively in the System Error Handler chapter of Inside
Macintosh.

Chapter4

| Debugging Macintosh Software

Often you'll be able to determine right away what your application’s last action
was before crashing. On the Macintosh, where lots of visual things are happening
as the application executes, you can use visual clues to determine what code is
being executed. For example, if your application is trying to bring up a dialog box
with six items by calling GetNewDialog, and it draws the box and the first four
items and then crashes, you have a pretty good idea that the last thing that your

application did before the crash was call GetNewDialog.
Sometimes it’s not that easy, of course. A crash may occur with no visual clues

to what part of the application is executing. There are other techniques you can use

to find out exactly how far the application got before the crash occurred, and we'll
discuss those later in this chapter.
When you determine what instruction caused the application to crash, you'll

note the next important fact: was the Macintosh executing ROM code when the
crash occurred, or was it running your application’s code? Frequently, crashes take
place in the ROM. This usually doesn’t indicate a bug in the ROM (although it can);

the ROM routines trust you to pass them reasonable parameters. If you don’t,
crashes of various kinds can occur.

What specifically caused the crash?
Every crash has a specific cause. For example, routines in the ROM may cause a

system error 25 if there’s no heap space available. If this happens, the only fact
that’s immediately apparent is that a system error 25 has occurred. You'll have to do
some investigative debugging to find out what triggered the error. For the pur-

poses of terminology, we'll say that the symptom of this crash was an out-of-heapspace condition; the cause of the crash was the lack of available heap space in a

specific call. The first fact, the symptom, is obvious because of the bomb dialog that
appears on the screen as soon as the error takes place. The cause isn’t readily
apparent and requires debugging work to determine it.

There are crashes other than the system error bomb dialog, of course. Another
crash that happens sometimes is the one that makes machine-gun-like sounds from
the speaker, usually accompanied by the screen going crazy. The cause of this
problem is that data is being stored into the special Macintosh addresses that
control the video and sound hardware. The usual reason for this crash is that the
application is attempting to use data that’s not valid, or the Macintosh is somehow
executing code that wasn’t intended to be executed; for example, the microprocessor has been told by your program or one of the ROM routines you've called to

begin executing code in an area of memory that’s really data, not code.
Just knowing the cause of the crash will not tell you what’s wrong with your
program and how to fix it. If your program dies with a system error 2 after calling
InsertMenu, you probably passed a bad parameter to InsertMenu, but the only way

to tell how the bad parameter got there is by examining your application. Once you
learn the cause of the problem, you'll have to do more legwork to discover exactly
what’s wrong.

87

88

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

At the end of this chapter, you'll find a discussion of common crashes and

possible causes for each crash.

What assembly language instruction was the last one executed
before the crash?
Now, all you high-level language programmers out there, stay cool. By studying

the information that’s presented in the rest of this book, you'll be able to learn how
to do this. Chapters 5 and 6 will tell you something about how your compiler works,
and you can read Appendix A if you want an overview of how the 68000 deals with

high-level languages. If you’re a high-level language programmer, there’s a corollary to this question: which statement in the source generated the instruction that
was executed right before the crash? Source-level debuggers help greatly with the

task of figuring this out.

As we've said, crashes are the result of the execution of a single instruction.

Although it may have taken lots of instructions to create the bad values that caused
the program to crash, the actual crash can be traced to a single machine language
instruction. If the crash is a system error number 1 through 11, there was a single

offending instruction that caused a microprocessor exception. If the crash is a
system error number greater than 11,

a ROM routine called the System Error

Handler by invoking the SysError trap.
The next trick in the debugging process is to find this single offending instruc-

tion. Sometimes, it’s trivial; often, it’s hard. If it’s trivial, it’s probably because you
passed the wrong parameter to a ROM routine. If it’s hard and the problem is a
tough one to reproduce, it may take you hours or days to find it.
One technique that’s commonly used to figure out exactly which instruction
caused a program to crash is rerunning the program one or more times, letting it go
farther and farther each time until you watch it crash. This can be done in the
source code, by inserting statements that wait until the mouse button is pressed, for
example, or by using an object code debugger to set breakpoints: places where the

debugger stops the program.

since most Macintosh applications are so visual, you can use visual clues to
help figure out how far to let the application go before setting a breakpoint. As we

discussed earlier, if you see the application draw part of a dialog box and then
crash, you have an excellent idea of the application’s last instruction before the
crash (it was probably GetNewDialog). Usually, the visual clues aren’t quite that

definitive, but they are always helpful in finding where the program was before it
crashed.

If you have a nonreproducible error, you can use the trap recording capabilities that debuggers have. Trap recording is a debugger feature that waits for trap
calls to be executed. When trap calls are made, the debugger will record some

information about the call, including which trap is being called, the location of the
instruction that’s calling it, and the parameters to the call. This way, when the

Chapter4

| Debugging Macintosh Software

program crashes, you can see which trap calls were most recently made, which is a
great help in finding the problem.
Trap recording is kind of like a security camera at a bank. Although you don’t

know when (or if) you'll ever need it, you install it. If the bank is robbed, you have
a visual record of what went on. By turning on trap recording, you'll make sure that

you have a record of what transpired if your program crashes.

What caused the offending instruction to be executed?
This is the root of debugging and usually the hardest step. The completion of this
step involves actually locating the bug. Somewhere in the application, faulty logic,

bad data, or bugs in system software caused the crash, and finding out why the
crashing instruction was executed means knowing what the bug is.

Finding the bug usually involves several different techniques used together.
Sometimes, an initial exploration into the bug doesn’t tell you what you need to
know, and you run headlong into a dead end. When this happens, you have to
attack it with a different technique. Usually, you don’t have to start over completely, though, because you'll be able to use the information you learned from
previous efforts. Debugging is like a big logic problem, and every tidbit, fact, and

clue that you pick up along the way can help you solve the puzzle.
After you've found the offending instruction, you may be able to discover the

problem immediately. For example, if the crash is an address error (system error 2)
that occurs in the ROM in the SelectWindow routine, you should immediately

examine the values of the parameters that you passed to SelectWindow. You may
find that you neglected to set up the value of the WindowPtr that you passed to
SelectWindow, and it contained an odd value, thus generating the address error. If
this is the case, you can probably fix the problem just by inserting a statement to set
up the WindowPtr before calling the ROM.

Killing ants with nuclear weapons.

Note that this particular error, which

is fairly typical of the kind Macintosh programmers commit, could be caught

just by examining the source, without using an object code debugger. What's

the easiest method? On the Macintosh, youd probably use an object code
debugger to determine, at least, the last statement that your application was
able to execute. At that point, you can go to your source listing and just step
through it, checking the parameters that you passed to the ROM. This
method has the advantage of being mostly in the high-level language, so it’s

easier for most high-level language programmers. The disadvantage is that
you're still looking at a piece of paper, and reality has a nasty habit of inter-

vening between the source listing and the program’s execution. What the
debugger tells you is the truth (if it’s a good debugger); the source listing is a

couple of steps removed from that truth, so you can’t always rely on it.

89

90

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

If you discover that one of the parameters to a ROM call was in fact causing the
crash, you're not out of the woods yet. You have to find out why that parameter
was passed to that particular call. If it’s just a constant in your program, the answer
may be easy: you just mistyped or used the wrong constant. If the bad parameter is

a variable, you have to find out where and why it went bad. Maybe you simply
forgot to assign it a value (sloppy you). Ifa variable containing a bad value was used
as a parameter to an earlier ROM routine, you may find that that ROM routine

placed an unexpected value in the variable. Closer investigation into the behavior
of the ROM routine should reveal more about the problem.
If the crash occurred in a ROM routine and you’
ve examined the parameters to
the routine and found them all to be reasonable, there are other problems to look

for. Does the ROM call rely on some global state of the system that may be set
improperly? For example, does the call assume that the current GrafPort has been
set to a certain value, like the frontmost window? Many of the QuickDraw calls

operate on the current port, that is, the last GrafPort that you passed to a SetPort
call. Usually, if ROM calls require globals to be set a certain way, Inside Macintosh

will say so.
No matter what the problem, one of the most valuable techniques for debug-

ging involves tracing a program’s execution by stepping through its instructions.
This can be done either with the aid of a debugger, such as MacsBug, or by hand by
stepping through your source or object code.

Don't be reluctant to try stepping through your source code yourself. When
you do this, you pretend that you’re the computer. Take a piece of paper and make

columns for each of your variables, and maybe have a space to represent what gets
drawn on the screen. As the variables and screen images change, make the changes

on your worksheet. If you're careful, you can make yourself almost as accurate as
the computer; you will find yourself several million times slower, but don’t sweat
it. In school, we used to call this “playing Mr. Computer” (it may be appropriate for

you to call it “playing Ms. Computer’’), and it’s a good way to attack problems that
you think are in your code. See Figure 4-1 for an example of a Mr. Computer

worksheet.
Once you're familiar with the object-code debuggers, you'll use one of them to
step through your program’s code. This is just like playing Mr. Computer, except
that the computer is actually helping you do it. With a debugger, the computer

makes itself be several million times slower than usual, just so that we humans can

keep up. We'll talk more about debuggers throughout the rest of this part of the book.

Chapter4

Figure 4-1.

Debugging Macintosh Software

Mr. Computer worksheet

Variables

myVal

theNum

n

Moe

Johann

42

16

4

Ealse

1487/5

4.

+8

2

True

324

49

3

3

False

AA.

12

9

A.

True

Q

5

—5

6

9.345
104.5

screen
Window1

Window2

Empty

The text “Fiinfzehn

The text ““Quinze

zweistimmige
Inventionen’’

Inventions a deux
parties”

Window3

Debugging tools
You can use lots of different techniques and tools to apply the debugging principles

we ve discussed. Some of these are source and object code debuggers, source code
walk-throughs, and special-purpose debuggers. We'll talk about each of these and

how to use them.

source and object code debuggers
Many of today’s development systems include nifty debuggers that let you single-

step through your source code and see what it’s doing at human speeds. Both of the
most popular systems, MPW and THINK C, include source debugging, although
the ways these two work are very different. MPW provides a scriptable, extensible
debugger called SADE (Standard Apple Debugging Environment). Like MPW
itself, SADE is very powerful, but it’s a little too much for some folks. THINK C

includes a more straightforward, less extensible, speedier source debugger.

source code walk-through
This method of debugging is the classic one, recommended by four out of five
computer science professors. To debug this way, you should lock yourself in a room

far away from the computer, take a printed copy of your program’s source listing
and notes from whatever debugging you've already done, and step through the
source code, line by line, playing Mr. or Ms. Computer by printing on a piece of
paper the values of variables and the output that the program generates.

92

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Walking through the source code is an important part of the debugging process, but in a complex environment like Macintosh, where dozens of different
“programs” (drivers, desk accessories, ROM routines, definition procedures for
menus, windows, controls, interrupt handlers, and so on) are executing all around

your application, the isolation of you and your source code doesn’t always provide
the answers you need. However, it is a good idea to get away from the computer

sometimes, relax with something to drink, and proceed at your own pace instead of
the computer’s for a while.
Before you retire off with your source listing, you should probably use one of
the other techniques discussed next to gather more information about your appli-

cation’s problem. The debuggers are a handy way to help determine the last thing
an application did before a crash; diagnostic output is good for learning where a

program is when it does something unusual but doesn’t crash completely.
One accessory essential to source code walk-throughs is a complete, up-to-date
source listing. You should always have an accurate source listing; that’s why we
have laser printers. There’s nothing more frustrating than spending hours tracking

down an elusive bug, only to finally discover that the bug was introduced by a
program change you made since your last source listing was printed.

Object code debuggers
Object code debuggers seem to be the most popular tool for debugging Macintosh

software. The advantage of object code debuggers is that they’re right next to the
action; that is, you’re seeing what really happens as your application’s object code
is executed. There’s virtually nothing that’s hidden from you, no layers of com-

plexity to keep you from observing the computer at work.
The disadvantage of object code debuggers is that they require you to read
assembly language, even if you wrote your program in a high-level language. Most
Macintosh high-level language programmers find the effort to get over this hump
worthwhile when they see how much an object code debugger can help in
programming.

A debugger hangs around in the computer’s RAM just waiting for your program to crash. When it does, the debugger takes control away from the System
Error Handler in the ROM, and instead of getting a bomb on the screen, you get the

debugger. You can also invoke the debugger without crashing the program; most
debuggers hook themselves into the interrupt switch (one half of the programmer’s
switch). By pressing this switch, you can jump into the debugger at any time and use
it to examine your program and anything else that’s going on inside the Macintosh.

Object code debuggers are the primary method of gaining information about
your application, but there are various other ways to find out what’s going on
inside the Macintosh. Some of them, like the source-code walk-throughs we

already discussed, are good ideas in any language; other tools and techniques
require special development environments.

Chapter4

Beware of debuggers.

Debugging Macintosh Software

When you're running a well-written debugger, you

feel like you're directly manipulating the microprocessor and the computer's
memory. Sometimes you forget that the debugger itself is a program. The job

of a debugger is to run without disturbing the rest of the system. This is
impossible, since debuggers take up RAM, use registers, allocate stack space,
and so on. Sometimes a debugger will lie to you as its operations become

inadvertently mixed with the program you're debugging. It can be very frustrating, for example, when a debugger refuses to continue tracing a program

that it’s been tracing for an hour because of some bizarre interaction between
the debugger and the program. Fortunately, this doesn’t happen often, but if
it happens to you, calm down and drink a nice glass of orange juice before

punching out the computer.

MacNosy and The Debugger
Debugging is a quirky art, so you may not be surprised when you go looking at

debuggers and you find one that has a picture of a giant nose on the front of the
package, along with a whip. This is MacNosy from Steve Jasik; it’s a disassembler
that will help you figure out what's going on in the Macintosh.

One of MacNosy’s best tricks, and probably the thing that it’s most known for,
is to help you disassemble the Macintosh ROM and other system software. A more

recent addition to the Jasik collection is The Debugger, which is a spreadsheet
program (just kidding). The Debugger works tightly with MacNosy to help you
find what's wrong with your program, or anybody else’s, if you want.

Special-purpose debuggers
Some development environments provide slick built-in debugging tools. As we’ve

mentioned, THINK C and THINK

Pascal include source-level debuggers that let

you perform single-stepping and set breakpoints. Also, MacApp implements a
debugger as a window that automatically traces the execution of your program,
letting you know when each routine is executed, as well as providing other vital
information.

One advantage of debuggers like this is that the debugging information presented is pretty high level; you don’t have to learn a lot about assembly language
and how the lowest levels of the system work in order to use them. However,when
you write a Macintosh application, you'll sometimes need to learn the absolute raw

truth, unprotected by a high-level language. When you need to know these lowlevel details, you'll probably use an object code debugger.

93

94

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Hardware debuggers
The ultimate debugger is a combination of hardware and software, is sophisticated

and powerful, is completely invisible to the program being debugged, and is
expensive. No, I’m not talking about hiring a Macintosh wizard—I’m referring to
the magical devices known as logic analyzers and in-circuit emulators.
To use an emulator, you unplug the microprocessor from your Macintosh’s
motherboard and plug in the emulator; or, if you’ve got a Macintosh with a slot in
it, you plug ina card. As the name implies, it then emulates the microprocessor. But

the emulator has debugging software built into it, and as the software in the
computer executes, the emulator is watching what’s going on very closely.
At its most primitive level, the emulator acts like an object code debugger: you

can do things like single-stepping through programs, recording traps, displaying
and disassembling memory, and so on. However, since the emulator occupies

absolutely no memory inside the Macintosh, it is truly transparent to the program
that’s running and thus has no effect on it.
But there’s lots more to an emulator than just that. Object code debuggers are
able to watch for ROM calls and take some action when they execute, such as entering

the debugger or recording information. There are also commands that perform some
action before each instruction is executed, like computing a checksum.
Since an emulator is actually taking the place of the microprocessor, it can do

much better than computing a checksum after each instruction. It can literally
watch the CPU’s address lines and perform a desired action whena specific address

is being written to. Think about that for a minute: let’s say that you know that your
application is trashing location 48376 once in a while, but you don’t know why.
With an emulator, you can tell it to watch for instructions that change the value in
48376. As soon as one executes, it'll stop and let you know. You can also do this
memory-watching by using MacsBug’s Step Spy command, but this slows the

Macintosh down so much that you can’t use it normally while Step Spy is on. You

should try it, though—it’s kind of fun to watch things being drawn in slow motion!
Many object code debuggers have trap recording commands; these commands

let you record the most recently executed traps so that when your application
crashes, you can see which ROM calls were made most frequently. An emulator
does that one better: it can record machine language instructions and let you look
at them later. Of course, a debugger could do this too, but it would be so slow that
it would be unusable.

sounds pretty great, right? Before you run down to K-Mart to buy yours,
though, you'd better know about the price. In-circuit emulators usually have four-

figure costs, and all those figures are on the left side of the decimal point. You can
usually lease the more expensive ones, but that’s not cheap either. Oh, well. Justin case
you ever need to debug a debugger, though, one of these babies sure comes in handy.

Chapter4

| Debugging Macintosh Software

Common crashes
For the next few pages, we'll discuss the symptoms of some common crashes and
possible causes for each crash. For each crash, we'll state the symptom, its appearance to the user, some reasons why the crash may have happened, and some

possible causes. This information will help you figure out what’s happened when
your application runs aground.

Crash #1
Symptom.

System error (bomb dialog).

Appearance.

Application stops, dialog with bomb icon, ‘Sorry, a system error

occurred,” “ID =xx” appears.
Why it happened
1. An executing routine, usually in the ROM, has called SysError because it
wanted to report a fatal error condition. These conditions include system errors

with numbers greater than 11. For example, 15 is a Segment Loader error, which
means that an application’s code segment could not be loaded into memory; 28
means that the stack has grown into the heap; 27 means that a disk directory has
been seriously damaged. See Figure 4-2 for the complete list.

2. The CPU has detected a fatal error condition. These conditions, called
exceptions, are then automatically reported by the System Error Handler. These
are all system error numbers from 1 to 11. Examples are error 3, illegal instruction
error, which means that the CPU was told to execute an instruction that was nota
valid instruction; error 4, zero divide, means that the CPU executed a divide

instruction with a divisor of zero. These are all listed in Figure 4-3.
Possible causes

1. ROM called SysError: Many of these system errors are the result of the heap
being nearly full (or badly fragmented). For example, the Segment Loader attempts

to load CODE resources by calling GetResource; if the GetResource call fails, it
posts system error 15. Usually, GetResource fails because there’s not enough room
in the heap to load the requested CODE segment, but it can also fail if the CODE

resource it’s after has been removed from the resource file (pretty uncommon).
2. 68000 exceptions: An address error or bus error often means that the application is relying on a handle or a pointer that has never been set up with the right
value; maybe the application declared a handle but forgot to assign it a value before
using it, or maybe the application called DisposHandle on a handle and then tried
to use it later (oops). An illegal instruction (system error 3) can mean that the
application made a ROM call that takes a ProcPtr, such as the ActionProc field in
TrackControl, and that the ProcPtr has not been set up to point to a procedure.

95

96

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Figure 4-2.

System errors generated by SysError

Error number
12

Comment

Unimplemented system routine; an unknown system call

13

Spurious interrupt; no interrupt handler for an interrupt

14

I/O system error; generated various ways by Device and File
Manager

15

Segment Loader error; couldn't find CODE or out of memory

16

SANE

17-24

error; halt bit was set

Can't load package; couldn’t find PACK or out of memory

29

Can't allocate heap block; out of memory in the heap

26

Segment Loader error; couldn't find CODE 0

27

File map destroyed; bad logical block number

28

Stack overflow; stack expanded into the heap

33

Free count negative; a heap block header is damaged

4]

Can't load the Finder

51

Unserviceable slot interrupt

81

Bad opcode passed to SANE package

83

Bad patch attempted with SetTrapAddress

84

A MENU resource was purged

85

MBAR resource not found

86

Hierarchical menu not found

87

Could not load WDEF resource

88

Could not load CDEF resource

89

Could not load MDEF resource

90

Floating point instruction but no FPU

98

Can't patch for this model Macintosh

99

Can't load patch resource

101

Memory parity error

102

System file too old for this ROM

103

32-bit mode, but ROMs not 32-bit clean

104

Must write new boot blocks

105

Not enough RAM to start System 7 (<1.5 Mb)

106

BufPtr too low during startup

Chapter4

Figure 4-3.

Debugging Macintosh Software

System errors caused by CPU exceptions
Comment

Error number
=

Bus error; reference to invalid memory space (Macintosh II)

WN

Illegal instruction; attempt to execute unknown 68000 instruction

FP

Divide by zero; attempt by 68000 to divide by zero

OO

Check exception; CHK instruction failed (usually a Pascal range error)

HD

TrapV exception; TRAPV instruction failed

CON

Trace exception; trace mode in 68000 is on

Oo

Line 1010 exception; trap dispatcher normally gets control here

©

Line 1111 exception; instruction $FXXX was executed

—

Address error; reference to word or long word at odd address

Miscellaneous exception, other 68000 exceptions come here

—

ee

Privilege violation; supervisor instruction in 68000 user mode

Nesting procedures in Pascal. Pascal users frequently have this problem
when they pass a pointer to a routine whose declaration was nested within

another procedure or function as a parameter of type ProcPtr. This happens

because the Pascal compiler pushesan extra parameter on the stack so that

theinner routine can use the outer routine’s variables when procedure declarations are nested.The ROM routines.don’t know about this extra param-

eter, though, so the stack gets messed up and virtually any kind of error can

result. For more about this, see Appendix B.

Crash #2
Symptom.

Bizarre display and sounds.
Screen turns to random garbage and changes rapidly, toggling

Appearance.

between two displays; speaker makes machine-gun-like sounds.
Why it happened. A routine is using a pointer or handle to write data into
memory that is mapped to the screen, the sound buffer, or a memory I/O address
that causes different parts of memory to be displayed to the screen.

97

98

PART TWO

&

DEBUGGING

Invalid pointers.

What's the difference between this kind of invalid handle

or pointer and the one reported by system error 2 (address error)? The answer

varies depending on the microprocessor. The 68000 deals with three sizes of
data: 8 bits (byte), 16 bits (word), and 32 bits (long word). Most objects in Macintosh memory are either words or long words. To provide a low level of error
checking, the 68000 requires that all words and long words be located at evennumbered addresses (bytes can be addressed at odd locations). Ifa 68000 instruc-

tion attempts to geta word or long word from an odd address, the 68000 assumes

that something has gone wrong and reports an address error. This means that
the 68000 will catch roughly half of your invalid handle and pointer uses.
If you happen to use an invalid handle or pointer that’s even, the 68000
cannot catch the error, and the screen-garbage crash (as well as other crashes)
can occur. For example, let’s assume that you've declared a handle called
myHandle, but mistakenly neglected to initialize it in your program. So the
handle contains a random value; whatever was in its location when the
program started up is still there. When you use the handle on the right-hand

side of an assignment statement, the Macintosh faithfully dereferences it.
What happens? If the value in the handle happens to be odd, an address error

will be signaled; if the value happens to be even, no error will be reported, and
the assignment will take place. If the handle points to valid memory, it may
write over some of your existing data; if it points to the screen, garbage may
appear on the screen; if it points to the soft switch that causes a different range
of RAM to be displayed on the screen, the screen can flash wildly.
50, when you have an invalid handle or pointer, you have about a fiftyfifty chance of getting caught by the 68000. If the handle or pointer is odd,
you
ll get a system error; ifit’s even, anything can happen, including a system
error at a later time.
On any Macintosh equipped with a 68020, 68030, or 68040 microproces-

sor, the rules changea little, just to make things more interesting. On these
processors, references to words or long words that are located at odd

addresses are just fine; they’re not reported as address errors. However, real

_live handles and pointers in the Macintosh are always even, so this flexibility
actually removes some nice error checking. All Macintosh models that have
appeared since 1987 have a feature that helps compensate for this: if a program tries to write to an invalid address, which is an address that’s not

anywhere in ROM, RAM, or memory-mapped I/O space, the system will
report a bus error (system error 1).

So, to summarize what happens when you use a bad number as a pointer:
Odd pointer, invalid address:

Bus error; address error on old 68000 machines

Odd pointer, valid address:

No error; address error on old 68000 machines

Even pointer, invalid address:
Even pointer, valid address:

Bus error; no error on old 68000 machines
No error, even if pointer is faulty!

Chapter4

Possible causes.

Debugging Macintosh Software

The causes for this crash are identical to those for system errors.

This crash is probably the result of an invalid pointer or handle that didn’t get

caught by the 68000 (if you’ve got a 68000); that is, it didn’t result in an odd-word
or long-word reference. Since the 68000 was unable to catch the error, the program

was able to cruise along until it started writing to the screen or screen-switch
hardware.

It’s important to note that by this time, the program has already gone completely haywire and may have written over lots of memory. You may not be

looking at the first damage caused by the runaway program, just the most visible.
This is true, of course, of any kind of crash, as we discussed earlier.

Crash #3
Symptom.

Macintosh reboots.

Appearance.

Macintosh acts just as if you had pressed the reset button; it bongs

and restarts.

Why it happened.

This, trivia fans, is called a double bus fault. This is what

happens when the CPU encounters an exception while it’s trying to deal with a

previous exception (if it’s not one thing, it’s another). On the 68000, the stack
pointer must always be even, pointing at an even address in memory. Normally,

the 68000 takes care of this for you automatically: when you push a byte-sized

value onto the stack, decreasing the value of the stack pointer by one byte, it
automatically adjusts the stack pointer by decreasing its value by one more so that

it remains even. The same happens when you remove something from the stack. If
the stack pointer somehow becomes odd, a double bus fault is signaled and the

68000 is reset. The 68020 and later processors couldn’t care less if you have an odd
stack pointer, so you probably won't see this on a non-68000-based Macintosh.
Possible causes.

Fora high-level language programmer, this crash is very similar

to the illegal instruction error (system error 3). The only way that an odd stack
pointer can be created is with an explicit 68000 instruction to put an odd value into
the stack pointer register (MOVE oddValue, A7). Since most high-level languages

never generate code like this, the only way such an instruction could get executed is
through a bug that causes the processor to start executing undefined memory as code.

One example of such a situation is the application passing an invalid parameter
as a ProcPtr toa ROM routine. If the invalid ProcPtr happens to point toa MOVE
1, A7 (or a move of any other odd value into the stack pointer), a double bus fault
will result, causing the computer to reboot.

99

100

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

An assembly language programmer, of course, can do this much more easily. If
you
re manipulating the stack pointer directly rather than indirectly, you can cause

this error with real code, so be careful.
The worst thing about this error is that it’s so destructive. Since the computer

reboots, you don’t get a chance to figure out what went wrong. Luckily, it’s pretty
rare, especially for high-level language programmers.

Some advice on debugging
Most programmers have a hard time describing their debugging processes in
depth. They'll tell you what debugger they use and a few tips and tricks, but the
overall process of debugging software is difficult to describe in a nice, clean series of
easy-to-follow instructions.
There are lots of reasons for this. Debugging is a problem-solving endeavor

with an immense amount of information to be sought, gathered, pondered, and
evaluated. Another thing that makes it hard is that no two debugging efforts are the
same. Each piece of software presents unique challenges. Some kinds of software
seem to be debugger resistant; that is, they present situations that confound and

confuse debugging tools and make them hard to use. When you run into these you
just have to try another way of attacking the problem.
The debugging process generally consists of information gathering, information evaluating, and experimentation. When your program crashes you try to learn

as much as possible about the nature of the crash. You try to answer the questions
we presented earlier in this chapter by gathering information that your debugging
tools provide you. Then, you sift through the information and try to determine

what went wrong. Sometimes, you may be able to reproduce the crash, looking
more carefully this time at the sequence of events that lead up to the crash. Finally,
you figure out what you think is wrong and try to fix it.
When you're in the information-gathering phase of debugging, you'll find that
you can usually think of lots of different ways to attack the problem. For example,
when your application crashes unexpectedly, you'll always want to know what

kind of crash it was and the location of the program counter when the crash
occurred, but then you'll want to find out other things. Should you try manually
changing a suspected bad value and attempt to continue execution? Should you
rerun the program, break somewhere before the crash, and use the debugger to
single-step the program? Should you trace into the ROM, suspecting a ROM bug?

Of course, there’s no single answer to these questions. You should try to
answer the questions we discussed in this chapter, but you can do so in a number

of different ways. Try different techniques and see which ones you feel most
comfortable with. Share ideas and tips with your friends. If you have no friends,
make some (it’s left as an exercise for the reader). Just make sure that you gather as
much information as you can and that you consider all the clues when you’re
figuring out the problem.

Chapter4 | Debugging Macintosh Software

In Chapter 7, we'll debug some real programs following the rules we discussed
in this chapter.

Things to remember

e The heavy use of the Macintosh ROM makes debugging particularly interesting. The best Macintosh programmer is one who can read an object code
listing, even if the program is written in a high-level language.
e System errors don’t tell you very much other than that a crash has occurred.
A lot more investigating is needed to know what went wrong.
e Debugging involves gathering facts by answering several questions,
including:

Where did the program crash?

What specifically caused the crash?

What assembly language instruction was the last one executed before the
crash?

What caused the offending instruction to be executed?
e Some popular debugging tools and techniques are object code debuggers,

source code walk-throughs, special-purpose debuggers, and logic analyzers.
e MacsBug is the name of a powerful object-code debugger that Apple provides for the Macintosh.

101

C

H

A

P

T

E

R

D

Examining Compiled Code
In this chapter, we'll look at how compilers translate programs to assembly lan-

guage and what the assembly language looks like. If you'd like to know more about
68000 assembly language before reading this chapter, you might want to read Appendix A, which introduces the 68000 family for high-level language programmers.

Compilers
To many high-level language programmers, the compiler is a big black box that
magically translates a sort-of-English program into an executing glob of machine
language. How this translation takes place is of no interest to most high-level

language programmers. In fact, this is why compilers were invented: to relieve
programmers of the low-level details of writing a computer program.

Well, if you've come this far, you probably know that it’s hard to get away with

that attitude when you're creating a Macintosh application. Because you have to
deal so intimately with so many details that are vital to the operation of the User
Interface Toolbox, it’s very difficult to completely divorce yourself from what's

happening at the low level. This is why we've stated the thesis that the best Macintosh programmer is one who knows the most about what's going on in the system
at all levels.

In this chapter and the next, we'll try to unlock some of the secrets of compilers
so that you'll be able to recognize your program in its naked object code form. We'll

discuss briefly what compilers do, and we'll spend a lot of time correlating Pascal
and C statements with their resultant assembly language output.

103

104

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Too much information. Most of the information that’s presented in this
chapter is generally applicable to high-level procedure-oriented languages
like Pascal and C. However, the specific examples of object code generation
were taken from the Macintosh Programmer’s Workshop. Remember that
compilers evolve over time, so use the concepts presented in this book to
observe your compiler’s behavior if it seems to be different. Also, some
enlightened compiler packages include documentation of this kind.

Since we have compilers to write assembly language programs for us, why
would anyone ever want to write directly in assembly language? Although the
compiler translates programs into assembly language, it’s very difficult to make a
compiler as smart as a human assembly language programmer. That’s because the
compiler is generalized; it handles lots of different cases the same way. The human
will generally be able to come up with tricks and techniques that the compiler
won't see. This means that human-written assembly language programs are almost
always smaller or faster (or both) than compiler-generated programs, if they’re

written by a smart programmer.

Some compilers have intelligence built into them to look for special situations
they can exploit to make the object code smaller or faster. This process in compilers
is known as optimization.

If this is your first journey into this sort of thing, you'll find that it’s really not so
bad after all. In fact, when you start studying your compiler’s output, you may soon
find yourself beating the compiler by rewriting some routines in assembly language. Yes, you!

As you know, a compiler is a program that translates a program written in an
English-like (usually) language like C or Pascal into an assembly language or

machine language program that can be executed by a microprocessor. Compilers
accept files of text as input and produce as output files that consist of a machinelanguage version of the program. Usually, another tool called a linker is required to
put all the pieces of the program together so that it can actually be executed. On the
Macintosh, the final step of the process is the creation of CODE resources.

The process by which the compiler converts your source statements to object
code is actually not all that magical (although it is pretty neat). In fact, compilers are
predictable when you're trying to figure out what sort of object code will result

from a given source statement.
Knowing what object code will result from your source code is important for
several reasons. For one thing, if you know what the compiler’s going to do when
you write certain source statements, you can help to optimize your program by

writing the most efficient code possible. More important for our purposes here,

Chapter5

Examining Compiled Code

you'll be able to navigate your way through your object code when you’re debug-

ging if you know what source statements produced the assembly language that

you
re looking at.
Compilers map the world of a high-level language onto the considerably lower
level but vastly more efficient world of the microprocessor. In the high-level language, you can create dozens or hundreds of variables, each of them known by a

real English name. They can have fancy structures, combining text with numbers in
any combination, with each member of the structure having its own name.
The compiler maps these data structures into assembly language for you.

When you use a variable, the compiler determines how much space in memory is
needed for the variable and automatically allocates and assigns that space. When
you refer to a field within a record or structure, the compiler computes the address

of the field that you're interested in and writes instructions to perform the appropriate action. The compiler sees to it that procedures reserve space for their local
variables when they begin executing and release that space when they’re done

executing. The compiler frees you from having to deal with these and hundreds of
other low-level details.

Of course, high-level languages also provide a variety of statements for you to
use in writing your programs. These include assignment statements; looping con-

structs like for, while, and repeat; control statements like goto, break, and continue;
procedure and function calls; conditional statements like if... then. . . else and case;
and more.

The job of the compiler is to create machine language equivalents for each of
these statements. The 68000 family has lots of instructions that were designed

expressly for use by high-level languages, and most compilers take advantage of
this smart design.

In some cases, source statements translate into a single assembly language
instruction; in other instances, one source statement can produce a whole chunk of

assembly language. Also, the compiler frequently has a choice of several different

ways to accomplish the same function. For example, when you pass the value zero
as a parameter to a procedure, there are several different object code instructions

that the compiler could produce that would all produce the desired result.
Which one does the compiler choose when there’s a choice? Usually, good

compilers will choose the option that produces the smallest instruction. Machine
language instructions have different lengths, and it’s possible that one operation
will be shorter than the others. Often the available options are the same length. In

this case, excellent compilers (those recommended by Tom Peters) will choose the
option that produces the fastest instruction. Machine language instructions are
precisely timed, and the times, which are listed in the microprocessor’s reference
manual, are strictly defined, so the compiler can actually choose the fastest instruction among several options. Some compilers even let you choose whether it’s more
important to have the fastest or the smallest possible object code. Of course, not all
compilers are well programmed enough to choose the best of several alternatives.

105

106

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Oh, twenty, oh, thirty, oh, forty. The 68020 uses lots of tricks to speed up
execution of object code. It has the ability to overlap instructions in some
cases, executing parts of two instructions at the same time. The 68020 also has

an on-chip instruction cache, which improves performance if the code being

executed is in the cache. In fact, the 68020 manual lists three times for every
instruction: best case, worst case, and cache case. These features make it
extremely difficult to time instructions precisely, but it’s still possible to get a

good idea of which choice would be fastest. The 68030 and 68040 add an
on-chip data cache for extra zip.

We'll start by discussing where compilers put variables and how they keep
track of them.

Allocating space for data
When a compiler translates your program into glorious object code, it must look

through your global variable declarations and allocate space for each of them. As
we discussed in Chapter 2, declared variables are placed on the stack. As the
compiler looks through your list of globals, it allocates space for each of them on the

stack, one by one, growing the stack as it goes. Let’s look at an example.
In the Macintosh Programmer’s Workshop Pascal and C examples shown in
Listing 5-1, there are four global variables. The first one, anInteger, will be allocated

first on the stack. Since the stack grows downward in memory, this means it will
occupy the highest location of any global variable in memory. The variable anIn-

teger will occupy two bytes in memory. Why? Because MPW Pascal integer vari-

ables and MPWC

short variables always take up 2 bytes. Their values can range

from — 32768 to 32767, which are the smallest and largest numbers that will fit into
2 bytes. It’s just that simple.
Before the compiler allocates space for the first variable, it decrements the stack

pointer by the size of the variable it’s going to allocate, growing the stack downward by the desired amount. So, when it gets to the next variable, aLong, it must

first grow the stack enough to accommodate a long integer (a Longint). Long
integers take up 4 bytes, so the compiler allocates 4 bytes for aLong.
As it allocates variables, the compiler remembers where it puts things, so that

later, when it translates statements that refer to these variables, it will know where
they are (so we don’t have to). For example, it remembers that it placed anInteger

at 2 bytes “below” the initial stack pointer, and when it encounters a statement that
assigns a value to anInteger, it will know where the value goes.

To allocate space for the next variable, aRecord, the compiler must determine
how much space the record will occupy on the stack. Doing this is easy: just add up
the number of bytes used by the structure components. This record starts with two

Chapter5

(

Examining Compiled Code

Listing 5-1.
Pascal:
PROGRAM Example;
VAR

anInteger

:

INTEGER;

aLong

:

Longint;

aRecord

:

RECORD

first,

second

:

INTEGER;

myHdl

:

Handle;

myPtr

:

~“someType;

END;

anArray

:

ARRAY

[1..50]

of

INTEGER;

BEGIN

{program statements

here}

END.

C:
short

long

anInteger;

aLong;

struct

{

}

short

second;

myHdl;

someType

*myPtr;

aRecord;

short

main

{

first,

Handle

anArray

[49];

()

/* program statements here */

}

\

integers; at 2 bytes each, that’s 4 bytes so far. Then there’s a handle. Remember that
a handle is the address of a master pointer. On a Macintosh, addresses are always

4 bytes long, so handles and pointers always occupy 4 bytes. The last field of the
record, MyPtr, is a pointer to some unknown type. In determining its size, we don’t
care what it points to. Since it’s a pointer, it’s the address of something, and it takes
4 bytes. Adding all this together, we come to a grand total of 12 bytes for the record.
The compiler will decrement the stack pointer by 12 to reserve space for this
structure.

The last global variable is the array cleverly called anArray, which consists of 50
integers. Once again, we can determine its size by computing the sizes of its com-

ponents. Integers occupy 2 bytes each, so 50 of them will cost you exactly 100 bytes.
In Pascal, we can specify that we want the array subscripts to run from 1 to 50. InC,

the first element of an array always has subscript zero, so our 50 element array has
elements numbered from zero to 49.
Figure 5-1 summarizes the global variables and their sizes.

107

108

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Figure 5-1.

Global variables and sizes

Variable

Pascal type

C type

Size in bytes

anInteger

Integer

short

2

aLong

LonglInt

long

4

aRecord

Record

struct

12

anArray

Array

Array

100

Figuring sizes of structures.

This can be a little trickier than we've dis-

cussed here. If everything in the structure is an even number of bytes long,
there’s no problem. However,if you have things like chars, which can fit into

1 byte, and Booleans, which can take as little as one bit, funny things can
happen. High-level languages generally like to keep fields on even-address

boundaries, so they'll usually allocate 2 bytes each for chars and Booleans.
If you prefer to make your data structures as small as possible, some
languages permit the word Packed in records and arrays. This causes the data
to be squeezed in as tightly as possible. Even with packing, there are restrictions. If you pack an array that has two chars next to each other, they'll be
packed into 2 bytes total; but if you have a char, followed by an integer,
followed by a char, no packing will occur and each char will take up 2 bytes,
as will the integer. Just for fun, some compilers will do some packing auto-

matically, even without a Packed in the source. There is a reliable way to
figure out how much space any data structure is using. Most languages that
do packing have a built-in function called SizeOf, which takes a data structure
as a parameter and returns its size in bytes. You can use this function to determine exactly how many bytes a particular data structure is really taking up.

Every data structure allowed by a compiler takes up a predetermined amount
of space on the stack. Figure 5-2 lists the most common data types and their sizes.
After global variables are allocated on the stack, they stay there until the application ends. That's why they’re global, of course. Local variables are allocated in
much the same way, but space for them isn’t reserved until the procedures or

functions that declare them are executed. When the procedure ends, the space for

the local variables is removed from the stack.

C adds several other ways of doing things. In addition to global and local, C
defines static variables as a sort of hybrid. Static variables have local scope—that is,
they're known only within the function in which they’re defined—but they have a
global life, since they retain their values between function calls. For debugging
purposes, static variables are really just globals in disguise. They live with and act

Chapter5

Figure 5-2.

Examining Compiled Code

Sizes of data types

Type

Size in bytes

Comment

Integer, short

2

Two’s complement integer (— 32768 to 32767)

Longint, long

4

Two’s complement integer (— 2147483648 to 2147483647)

signedByte

1

Two’s complement integer (— 128 to 127)

Boolean

1

Value in bit 0 (0 = false,1 = true)

Char

2

ASCII code in low byte, high byte unused

Real

4

SANE

single-precision format

Single

4

Same as Real

Double

8

SANE

Extended

10

SANE extended-precision format

Comp

8

SANE computational format

String [7]

n+]

double-precision format

Length byte followed by ASCII codes

Byte

2

Two’s complement integer, value in low byte

Ptr

4

Address of data; includes any parameters preceded by @

Handle

4

Address of master pointer; includes any kind of handle

Point

4

QuickDraw coordinate

Rect

8

QuickDraw rectangle; two points (goaltending)

just like globals. Local variables that are baked fresh each time a function is invoked
are called automatic.
Another C feature is the ability to keep variables in the microprocessor’s registers instead of on the stack. Although most Pascal compilers will take advantage

of CPU registers as places for temporary variable storage, C allows you to have local
variables that will always be kept in registers, with no stack usage. You can specify

one of these by using the word register when you declare a variable, like this:
register

long

timeGone;

When it compiles a procedure or a function, the compiler generates code to
make sure that space is reserved on the stack for the procedure’s local variables. It
reserves space just as it does for global variables. As the compiler encounters each
variable declaration, it creates a location for the variable that will be on the stack
when the application runs. When it compiles statements that reference local variables, it fills in the appropriate address.

Global variables take up space throughout the life of the program. For local
variables, the compiler generates code that reserves stack space when the proce-

dure begins; it also generates code to reduce the stack when the procedure ends.
The stack is cut back just far enough to remove the local variables from it. This is

109

110

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

how high-level languages implement the concept of scope; when a procedure

ends, its local variables are no longer accessible because the stack is cut back to

where it was before they were allocated.
some compilers don’t remove local variables from the stack as soon as a routine

ends. Instead, they'll allow the variables for several routines to collect, then cut
them all back with one instruction.

It’s also interesting to note a slight variation in the way this is done in most
Pascal compilers versus most C compilers. In Pascal, you'll usually find that each

procedure or function is responsible for removing its own parameters from the
stack just before it ends. When you look at most C code, however, you'll find that
the caller, which pushes the parameters on the stack before calling a function, is

also responsible for removing the parameters after the function has been called.
Once again, the only way to know how your compiler handles this is to look for
yourself.

Constants 2are a. virtue. What happens to constants when you compile a

program? Constants are simply alternate ways of representing valuesin the

- source code. They take up absolutely 1 noadditional space in the object code;

they're completely forgotten in the object code. Since constants don’t cost

you anythingin the object code, yousshould use them liberally to help doc- ument your source.

os

Stack frames
We've said that a program’s variables are usually kept on the stack and that the
compiler keeps track of each one’s location. Since Macintosh programs can wind up
being loaded almost anywhere in memory, they must be position independent. How

does the compiler keep track of variables’ locations ina position-independent way?
At first it might seem that each variable is kept at a known offset from the stack
pointer. In the example in Listing 5-1, the first variable declared is an integer. It will

be located at 2 bytes below the stack pointer, since the stack pointer will be decremented by 2 bytes to reserve space for it. But there’s something wrong here: the

stack pointer is decremented as each variable is allocated. So we can’t say that a
variable is a certain offset from the stack pointer, because the stack pointer keeps
changing!

A good solution is to record the initial value of the stack pointer before any
variables are allocated and use offsets from that recorded value to get to variables.
If we recorded the value of the stack pointer before any variable allocations took
place, we would know that the first variable, anInteger, would be stored 2 bytes

below the recorded initial stack pointer value. We would also know the other
variables’ locations: aLong is at 6 bytes below the recorded value (anInteger’s 2 plus

Chapter5

Examining Compiled Code

aLong’s 4),aRecord is at — 18 from the initial value, and anArray is at — 118 from the
recorded value, Figure 5-3 shows the list of global variables again, but this time you

can also see where each one is located in memory.

Ups and downs.

As we've said, the stack grows downward in memory, so

each successive new variable has an increasingly larger negative number as

its offset. However, the bytes in the objects themselves are stored in order
from low to high memory. For example, the first element in anArray is stored

at the array’s lowest address, the next element is kept in the next higher bytes,
and so on. That’s why anArray starts at — 118 and ends at — 19.

This seems like a good way to keep track of global variables. You probably

won't be too surprised to learn that we didn’t just invent this idea. It’s been around
fora long time, and most Macintosh compilers are designed to use this technique of

recording the initial setting of the stack pointer and referring to global variables by
their relative position to the recorded value.
Macintosh applications accomplish this by remembering the initial value of the

stack pointer; it’s saved in register A5. This is done automatically by the Segment

Loader whenever an application is started (that is, whenever the Segment Loader
trap Launch is called). The compiler assumes this fact when it compiles a program
and translates all references to global variables as A5-relative references.
All global variables are allocated at a negative offset from the initial stack

pointer (see Figure 5-4). This means that all references to global variables in the
application's code will be as negative offsets from A5. In assembly language, these

kinds of references are written like this: — X(A5).
In our example in Listing 5-1, we know that anInteger is —2 from A5; this

would be written as —2(A5) in the object code. Assembly language hotshots
around the world pronounce this ‘minus two off A5.” It means to take the address
that’s in register A5 and subtract two from it. Later in this chapter we'll see how this

sort of reference is used in a complete assembly language instruction.

Figure 5-3.

Variable

Global variables, sizes, and locations

Type

Size in bytes

Starting address*

Ending address*

anInteger

Integer

2

—2

—1

aLong

Longint

4

—6

—3

aRecord

Record

12

—18

—7

anArray

Array

100

—118

—19

* Addresses are relative to initial stack pointer.

111

112

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Stack

"Oldest" things

on stack are at
highest addresses

|

AS

First variable

Second variable

Third variable

Fourth variable
Fifth variable

Sixth variable

Stack pointer (SP) ———
Figure 5-4.

Seventhveriable

"Newest" things
on stack are at

lowest addresses

Global variables on the stack

What about local variables? Each procedure creates its own little world of
variables. The compiler can’t simply allocate space for each procedure’s local variable on the stack at compile time, because local (automatic) variables only exist
during the execution of the procedure that defines them. What can we do here?

The answer is very similar to the solution for global variables. As a procedure
begins executing, it should save the value of the stack pointer before any local
variables are allocated. Then it can remember the location of each variable as a
negative offset from this recorded value.

In code produced by most Macintosh compilers, the value of the stack pointer

before any local variables are allocated is saved in register A6. Then local variable
references are defined as —X(A6). So we now know a quick, easy way to spot

references to global and local variables in object code: anything that’s — X(A5) is a
global variable, and anything that’s — X(A6) is a local.
As usual, there’s a complication we have to consider here. What happens if one

procedure calls another? The called procedure can’t use A6 to hold the saved stack
pointer value, because it’s already in use by the calling procedure. So what happens? The answer is deceptively simple. The called procedure saves the old value of

Chapter5

Examining Compiled Code

Aé on the stack, then puts the current stack pointer into A6, and then starts allocating
space for local variables. An ingenious technique, don’t you think? If you want to
take a few minutes to be sure you understand what's going on, the diagram in
Figure 5-5 may help.

With most compilers, every procedure sets up A6 in this way before it allocates
local variables. This means that A6 is used by every procedure as a base for its locals.
The piece of the stack that a procedure uses for its local variables is known asa stack
frame. The register that’s used to point to the start of the local variables, register A6,

is called the frame pointer.
Remember that we said register A5 was used to point to the start of the global
variables and that globals were found at negative offsets from A5. For this reason,
A5 is sometimes called the global frame pointer.

Stack

Stack

Globals

Globals
Ad

A5

Ad

First

Locals

procedure's
locals
SP

Saved A6é
New procedure's

locals
Before calling

procedure
Figure 5-5.

A procedure calls another procedure

After calling

procedure

Ad

sp

i2

114

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

_ A5.and Aé6 as framepointers. Register AS is always set up by the Segment.
_ Loader to be the value of the initial stack pointer, so almost every Macintosh |

language uses it as the place to start allocating global variables. However,
. there’s nothing intheROM thatspecifically supports using A6as a local frame

_- pointer. Virtually allMacintosh languagesuse :A6as their local frame pointer,
_ but they could choose another usable register,such as A4. One good reason

for using A6is that most of the ROM routines create stack frames for their own

local variables, and they all do sousing A6 as the frame pointer. Since each

procedure saves the previousvalue of A6,a debugger can use these saved A6
values to provide information about recently called procedures. Most com-

pilers will create a local stack frame even.ifaprocedure orfunction has no
locals,since it’s handy for debugging.
oes
|

The 68000 family, smart little folks that they are, are designed for use by high-

level languages like Pascal and C. These chips include specific instructions that
support common practices of high-level languages, such as creating and destroying stack frames.

Let’s take a look at the assembly language that’s needed to set up a stack frame.
Whena procedure begins executing and it creates a stack frame, it must do three
things: first, it must save the value of A6 on the stack, since it’s about to put a new

frame pointer in that register; second, it must put the value of the stack pointer into
A6, creating the frame pointer; finally, it must decrement the stack pointer to
reserve space for the procedure’s local variables.
In assembly language, these three things are:
MOVE.L A6,

—(SP)

;save

MOVE.L

SP,

A6

;put

SUB #X,

SP

current

A6

stack pointer

;reserve X bytes

in A6

for

locals

since this operation must be repeated at the start of every procedure, the 68000
has defined a single instruction that does the equivalent of these three instructions.

This is the LINK instruction. It takes two parameters: the address register to use as
a frame pointer and the number of bytes by which the stack pointer should be
changed to reserve space for local variables (a negative number).
90, if we were compiling a procedure that had 8 bytes of local variables, the
instruction LINK A6,—8 would be generated by the compiler at the beginning of

the procedure. When we run the program and execute this procedure, the LINK
instruction would set up the stack frame with A6 as the frame pointer.
Notice that this just reserves the space on the stack for the variables; it doesn’t

give them any values. This is where “uninitialized data” errors happen: if you

Chapter5

115

Examining Compiled Code

accidentally rely on a variable that has never been initialized, you'll get whatever

value happened to be in the variable’s location when the stack space was reserved.
It’s kind of like playing Russian roulette: you might not get shot the first time, but
you will eventually.

When the procedure is finished executing, its local variables must be removed
from the stack. This can be accomplished by destroying the local stack frame that

was set up for the procedure. We can take care of this in two steps: first, we put the
frame pointer back into the stack pointer. This cuts the stack back to the size it was
before the LINK instruction allocated local variable space. The second thing we
must do is replace the old value of Aé that was saved on the stack by the LINK

instruction (see the preceding discussion of LINK if you forgot that it did this).
In assembly language, we can accomplish this with two instructions: MOVE.L

A6, SP will put the stack pointer back where it was before allocating space for locals;
MOVE.L (SP) +, A6 will put the old value of A6, which LINK saved on the stack,
back into A6 where it was when the procedure started. These two instructions
leave things the way they were when the procedure was entered, as you can see in
Figure 5-6.

Once again, the 68000 gets a gold star here. Just like the case of the LINK
instruction, the 68000 defines a single instruction to handle the dismantling of the
stack frame that would otherwise take two instructions. The instruction is called
unlink, and the assembler mnemonic for it is UNLK. It takes one parameter, which
is the address register that was used as the frame pointer. So most of the time you'll
see this at the end of a procedure: UNLK A6.

Stack

Stack

Globals

Globals

Stack

Globals | |

Stack

Globals

| 436892

:

<+—

Before calling
procedure
Figure 5-6.

sp

436892

a

-

Saved Aé Bais

After LINK Aé in
called procedure

Destroying the local stack frame

SP and Aé

After MOVE.L A6é,SP

SP

After MOVE.L (SP)+,A6

116

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Parameters
There’s one other kind of data that procedure-oriented languages work with:

parameters. When a Pascal or C program calls a procedure or function, it goes
through a well-defined sequence of steps. First, if it’s a Pascal function, the program
decrements the stack pointer to reserve space for the function’s result (C functions
usually return their results in a register). Then, if the procedure has any parameters, they're pushed onto the stack, one by one.

Here C and Pascal usually differ: most C’s push the parameters in right-to-left
order, so the last one listed in the routine’s declaration is the first pushed; most
Pascals push parameters the other way, left to right as they’re listed in the declaration. Also, some compilers vary from these rules. In particular, some C’s pass
parameters in registers, rather than on the stack. To find out what your compiler

does, check its documentation or better yet, take a look at the compiled code that it
produces.

-. The ROMis Pascal-chauvinistic. Wws important to note that the routinesin

_ the Macintosh ROM follow the Pascal convention. That is, they expect their

-

parameters pushedin left-to-right order as listedin Inside Macintosh. This

- presentsa problemfor Ccompilers. There are at least two ways to solve the
~ problem. One ratherobnoxious solution would be to define the interfaces for
the ROM routines with their parameterslisted backwards.

Amore reasonable solution, whichisusedby most available C compilers,
is to define an alternate, “backwards” parameter-passing convention for
specified routines. For example, MPWC and some other C’s define a special
keyword pascal that, when usedin a function declaration, tells the compiler

_ that calls to this procedure should have their parameters passedleft to right,

like Pascal, instead of the normal (for C) right to left.

Also, many C compilers pass parameters to functionsin registers instead

of on the stack. The exact rules ofpassing parameters vary; you should check

your compilers8| documentation or take a look at—_ object code that the

After the parameters have been pushed, the routine is called. In assembly
language, the actual call to the procedure or function is accomplished with a JSR
(jump to subroutine) instruction. The JSR saves a return address on the stack so that
the called procedure can finish execution with an RTS (return from subroutine)
instruction.

What say we declare a simple procedure:
PROCEDURE

MrCairo

(friends:

INTEGER);

Chapter5

le

Examining Compiled Code

In C, we can use this function:
void MrCairo

(short

friends);

This routine takes one parameter, an integer. The code that the compiler generates to call it will first push the parameter, friends, onto the stack. This is done
with a MOVEN, — (SP) instruction. If the parameter is a local variable, N will be in
the form — X(A6); if it’s a global variable, N will be — X(A5). In both of these cases,
X is the offset from the frame pointer that’s computed by the compiler:
What if the parameter we send to MrCairo is a constant? In this case, the

compiler simply places a constant in the instruction. For example, if we write
MrCairo (7); in the source, the object code will be MOVE #7, — (SP), followed by the

JSR to the procedure.

Pushing the parameter places it on the stack; JSR-ing to the procedure puts a
return address on the stack. So, when the procedure begins executing, there are
these two things already on the stack. The first thing the called procedure does is a

LINK A6, — X to set up the stack frame. Figure 5-7 shows what the stack looks like
while this is going on.

Stack

Stack

Stack

Stack

Stack

Globals

Globals

Globals

Globals |

Globals

28156

56

Before calling
procedure
Figure 5-7.

|

Ab =

Ab =

Parameters

Parameters

Parameters

Return

Return

Return

address

address

7

Saved Aé

After calling,
before LINK

LINK instruction

(28156)

sP

LINK: saves
Aéonstack...

Parameters
Return

address

address

Saved Aé

Saved Ad

|

Space for

:

LINK: puts SP
inAéd...

(28156)

|. Ad
sp

LINK: reserves
space on stack
for locals

118

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

How does the compiler translate references to the parameters within the procedure? Notice in Figure 5-7 that parameters are always located at a positive offset
from (“above”) the frame pointer, register A6. So, in object code, you'll see references to the procedure’s parameters in the form X(A6). [You can compare this to

globals, which are — X(A5), and locals, which are — X(A6).] Also, note that the first
4bytes pointed to by Aé are always the saved value of the previous A6, and the next
4bytes are the return address to the calling routine, so parameters will always be at

least 8 bytes off A6. In our example, the parameter friends will be seen in object code
as 8 (A6).

Now the procedure does its thing. When it’s getting ready to finish, it does an
UNLK A6 to destroy the stack frame. Figure 5-8 shows what the stack looks like at

this point. If the procedure executes an RTS at this point, we have to worry about
the parameter, which is still on the stack. This is another situation where C and
Pascal usually differ. Most C compilers would cause the calling function to remove

the friends parameter after MrCairo returned. This seems to make sense: the caller
pushed the parameters, the caller removes them.
However, most Pascal compilers don’t do it this way. Instead, Pascal proce-

dures and functions typically remove their own parameters before returning.
Whether the parameters are removed by the calling routine or the called routine
itself, it still has to get done one way or another.

Stack

Stack

Globals |

Globals

Stack

|

Globals

| Ab = 28156

Parameters

Parameters
Return

Return

address

address

Saved A6

f°

(28156)

e

Saved Aé

(28156)
pees

Locals

At end of procedure,
before LINK
Figure 5-8.

Aé and SP

eee"

UNLK: puts
Aé in SP

UNLK instruction

SP

UNLK: puts saved Aé
from stack into Aé

Chapter5

Examining Compiled Code

When we needed to remove the locals from the stack, we were able to do just
an UNLK, which put the stack back the way it was before the LINK instruction.
UNLK knows where to put the stack pointer because the LINK instruction saved
the stack pointer. There’s no clever machine instruction that will remove the
parameters automagically, then replace the return address on the stack, so we'll

have to do it by hand.
The procedure knows how many bytes its parameters occupied. Allit has to do

is pop the return address off the stack, save it somewhere, and then increment the
stack pointer by the size of the parameters. In assembly language, we can accom-

plish this with two instructions: first, we can pop the return address off the stack
into a scratch register, AO, like this: MOVE.L (A7)+, AO; then we can remove the
two bytes of parameters from the stack by incrementing the stack pointer by two
bytes: ADDQ #2,A7. Figure 5-9 shows how the stack looks at this point. The code that

removes parameters and cleans up at the end of a procedure is called the epilog.
If we’re in Pascal, we’re ready to return to the code that called the procedure.
But we can’t do an RTS; RTS returns to the address that is on top of the stack, and
we already removed our return address from the stack and putitin AO. What do we
do? We could put the return address back on the stack and then execute an RTS,
which would work, but there’s a better way: a single instruction JMP (A0), which
means “jump to the address that’s in A0.”” Since AO contains the desired return

address, this works great, and it saves an instruction over the other solution. Neat!

Stack

Stack

Stack

Globals |

AO =
_ return address

Parameters
Return
address

After UNLK
Figure 5-9.

| SP
After MOVE.L (SP)+ ,AO
Removing parameters from the stack

After ADDQ #2, SP

AO
=
return address

119

120

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

In C, the parameters are waiting on the stack after we return to the calling

function, so they can just be removed directly. This is another benefit to C’s method
of having the calling function remove the parameters.
There are a couple more interesting facts that you'll need to know about
parameters. First, Pascal programmers will remember that Pascal defines two kinds
of parameters, call-by-name (or call-by-reference), and call-by-value, also known as
variable and value parameters. When a procedure uses a variable parameter, it is

permitted to change the variable; when it uses a value parameter, it cannot change

the value of the parameter that’s passedto

it.

Here’s what's really going on. When you pass a value parameter, that’s exactly

what goes on the stack: the value that’s specified. For example, let's define a procedure:
PROCEDURE

DejaVu

(david,

stephen

:

integer;

VAR neil,

graham

:

integer
);

In this declaration, the first two parameters, david and stephen, are value

parameters, and neil and graham are variable parameters. So, if we call the proce-

dure like this,

DejaVu (intl, int2, int3, int4);
the first two parameters are passed by value and the next two are passed by
reference. This means that the values of int1 and int2 will be pushed on the stack;
DejaVu has no way of changing the values of intl and int2. On the other hand, the
procedure must be given a way to access and change the values of int3 and int4,
since they're VAR parameters. So the compiler will pass pointers to int3 and int4 on
the stack. That way, DejaVu will know where they’re stored in memory, and it can
change them.

When you, the programmer, write the procedure, you’re completely unaware

that you’ve been passed a pointer to variable parameters and the value of value
parameters; the compiler takes care of it for you. The only thing that the average
Pascal programmer knows is that a variable parameter can be changed on the left
side of an assignment statement, but a value parameter cannot.

C is more straightforward. Most C compilers pass their parameters by value,
except arrays, which are always passed by pointer. In general, if you want any
other parameter to be passed by pointer instead of value, you have to precede the
parameter with an ampersand (&), which is the C operator that means “take the

address of.”

Chapter5

_

Examining Compiled Code

~ A great, butnerdy, joke. Here isan1 apocryphal story about Niklaus Wirth,
the creator of Pascal: Professor Wirth. was giving a lecture, and someone

inquired asto the pronunciation of. his:name. The professor responded,
“Well,there aretwo correct options.Youcancallmebyname, whichis ‘veert,’
or you cancall me by value, whieh
¥
iis: ‘wor

oo

Here’s one last complication about Pascal parameters, and then we’ll move on.

If a procedure has a parameter that is more than 4 bytes long, the compiler doesn’t
push the parameter on the stack. Instead, it pushes a pointer to the parameter;

then, as part of the procedure’s initialization code, right after the LINK instruction,
it makes a local copy of the parameter. It then uses this local copy in the procedure.

Why doesn’t the Pascal compiler just pass the whole value on the stack the way
it does for parameters of less than 4 bytes? The answer to this question is little
known, it seems to be a remnant of older microprocessors, like the 6502, which have
very small stacks. In the 6502, for example, that stack can only be 256 bytes long. To
help preserve this tiny space, Pascal compilers would make a local copy of param-

eters longer than 4 bytes and pass a pointer on the stack using only the stack space
needed for a pointer. This vestige of old systems is still with us.
There are a couple of common variable types that are always passed to proce-

dures by the “pointer on the stack, make a local copy” technique. Pascal strings,
even if they’re less than 4 bytes, are always passed by this method. Also, the

Standard Apple Numerics Environment (SANE), which is the IEEE-standard
numerics package that works on all Apple computers, passes its variables by
pointer. These include the types Real, Single, Double, Extended, and Comp. If you

want to learn more about SANE, see the Apple Numerics Manual.
Remember that this ‘“make a local copy” stuff doesn’t happen with C compilers. Again, C compilers will push a parameter’s address only if it’s an array, if it’s
preceded by the & operator, or if you’ve used the “pascal” keyword when declaring the function, which you usually have to do fora routine that’s going to be called
by the system somehow.

You now have the complete set of rules for parameters: in Pascal, variable

parameters are passed by a pointer to the variable; value parameters greater than 4
bytes, plus strings and SANE types, are passed by making a local copy and then
passing a pointer to that copy; other value parameters smaller than 4 bytes are

passed by value. Figure 5-10 lists the common data types and more explicit information on how they’re passed. In C, the rules are simpler: parameters are always

passed by value, except arrays, which are always passed by pointer. C compilers
will not make a local copy and pass a pointer to it, as will MPW Pascal and other
Pascal compilers.
In the next section, we'll see some actual examples of procedure and function

calls and the resulting assembly language.

121

122

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Figure 5-10.

Sizes of parameters

Type

Size in bytes

Comment

Integer

2

Two's complement integer (— 32768 to 32767)

Longint

4

Two’s complement integer (— 2147483648 to 2147483647)

SignedByte

2

Two’s complement integer in low byte (— 128 to 127)

Boolean

2

Value in bit 0 of high byte (0 = false, 1 = true)

Char

2

ASCII code in low byte, high byte unused

Real

4

Pointer to value converted to Extended
Pointer to value converted to Extended

Single

4

Double

4

Pointer to value converted to Extended

Extended

4

Pointer to value

Comp

4

Pointer to value converted to Extended

String [7]

4

Pointer to string

Byte

2

Two's complement integer, value in low byte

Ptr

4

Address of data; includes any parameters preceded by @

Handle

4

Address of master pointer; includes any kind of handle

Point

4

QuickDraw coordinate

Rect

4

Pointer to QuickDraw rectangle

Statements and variables
As we discussed earlier, compilers are pretty predictable when it comes to trans-

lating statements into assembly language. In this section, we'll look at how some

kinds of statements are translated and the resulting object code. With the information that you get here, you might learn enough to become a human compiler;
however,computers are generally better at that than humans, so you're more likely

to use this knowledge to help you trace through object code as you're debugging.

Once again, it’s important to know that these descriptions and algorithms
apply to the MPW compilers. Your mileage may vary. You can take the things
explained here and use them to examine your own compiler’s object code. You can
then determine exactly how it does things.
When you start looking at the object code produced by compilers, you start to
appreciate how well thought out the 68000 family CPUs are. Many high-level

language statements translate into a short, straightforward sequence of assembly

language instructions, as we'll see. Some statements can be translated into a single
machine language instruction.

Chapter5

Examining Compiled Code

Assignment statements
One of the most common and elementary statements in any language is the assign-

ment statement. This is the one that puts values into variables. In Pascal, it takes the
form VarName := expression, and in C it’s varName = expression.

The assignment statement has an easy translation into assembly language. The

assignment statement first computes the value of the expression on the right side
and then places that value into the variable specified on the left side. In the object
code, as we’ve discussed, a reference to a variable is translated into the address
occupied by that variable; if it’s a global, it’s — X(A5), and so on.
So the assembly language equivalent to an assignment statement is a sequence
of instructions to compute the value on the right side, followed by a single MOVE
instruction to place the value into the variable’s memory. Let’s look at some examples of assignment statements. First, we'll assume these declarations:
var

intl,

int2,

longl,

Singl,
extl,

intResult,

long2

sing2
ext2

:

:

longint;

:

single;

bool2

:

boolean;

charl,

char2

:

char;

subl,
recl

string2

sub2
:

:

integer;

extended;

booll,

stringl,

counter

:

:

string[255];

0..100;

record

fint

:

integer;

fbool

:

flong

:

fpoint

boolean;

longint;
:

point;

end;

arrayl

:

ptrl,

ptr2

array
:

[1..20]

of

integer;

ptr;

If you prefer to look at C, here’s your version:
short

intl,

long

longl,long2;

int2,

intResult,

float

Singl,

extended

extl,

Boolean

booll,

bool2;

char

charl,

char2;

Str255

stringl,

short

subl,

struct

sing2;
ext2;

string2;

sub2;

counter;

123

124

PART TWO

short

DEBUGGING

fint;

Boolean
long

Point
}

fbool;

flong;

fpoint;

recl;

short

arrayl[19];

Ptr

ptrl,

ptr2;

There are a couple of differences in the C version. The Pascal subrange types
sub] and sub2 are declared as short, since there’s nothing like subranges in C. The
array variable, array1, has subscripts 1 through 20 in Pascal. In C, array subscripts
always start at zero, so the array] is declared to have 20 elements, numbered zero

through 19.
Now let's look at some assignments to these variables; we'll display the assem-

bly language that the compiler produces as comments in each line. For easy reading, all numbers shown are decimal (base 10) unless they’re preceded by a dollar

sign, although most debuggers show values in hexadecimal.
Pascal:
intl

:=

500;

{MOVE #500,

-—8(A5)}

/*MOVE #500,

—2(A5)*/

C:
intl

=

500;

In this example, we’re simply assigning a constant to a global variable, so the

object code is pretty simple, just moving an immediate value (the # in front of 500
signifies that it’s an immediate) into the variable (be sure to read Appendix A

if

you're feeling lost in the assembly language). One thing here bears closer examination. The Pascal version says that int] is at — 8(A5), but our declaration said that
int] is the first variable declared. Since it’s an integer, it’s 2 bytes long, and it should

be at — 2(A5), as it is in the C version. What's the deal?
The answer lies in the fact that we declared several integers on one line: int1,
int2, intResult, and counter. When the Pascal compiler allocates space for variables

that are declared in a bunch like this, it proceeds from right to left in the list. So the

honored first space at — 2(A5) is given to counter, at — 4(A5) is intResult, int2 will be
located at — 6(A5), and space for int] is reserved next at — 8(A5).
The C compiler, on the other hand, allocates variables in the order that they're
encountered, so intl comes first, then int2, and so on.

Chapter5

Examining Compiled Code

Remember, this is the way that our particular compilers do things. Yours may

be different, and the only way to know is to experiment by studying your object

code and reading any documentation that your compiler supplies on this obscure
topic. Also, don’t ever count on compiler algorithms like this for tricks in your
programs. If you do, you're sure to get burned as the compiler evolves. Use this

juicy info only for debugging, and you'll wind up keeping more of your hair.

Multiple parameters.

When we declared more than one variable on the

same line in Pascal, like this:
var

Co

intl,

int2,

intResult, counter

:

integer;

the compiler allocated space for them from right to left (counter first, then

intResult, and so on). That’s not the case for procedure parameters. We
declared

PROCEDURE DejaVu (david,
graham

:

stephen

:

integer; VAR neil,

integer);

Pascal procedure parameters are always pushed in the order that they're

declared. That means that we could also declare this procedure like this:
PROCEDURE DejaVu

neil:

Integer;

(david:

Integer;

VAR graham:

stephen:

Integer;

VAR

Integer);

and the compiled code would be exactly the same. The first method requires

less typing, and it’s the usual way of doing it. The same is true, in reverse, of
C compilers. C pushes parameters from right to left, according to the function

declaration.

Pascal units.

If your application has separately compiled units that have

their own global variables, they may come first below A5, before the main
application’s globals are allocated. Their exact placement depends on the
development system you're using. In

MPW Pascal, your application's globals

are allocated first, then any unit globals, including QuickDraw. To find out
exactly where your variables are stored, you may want to write a dummy

procedure that does nothing but assign values to all your globals; you can

then look at the object code to see where each variable is. Or, if your development system has a linker that provides link maps, like MPW, you can create

and examine a link map to see where everything is.

125

126

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

As long as we've discovered this rule about variable allocation, let's make a
chart of our global variables and their locations. You might try this one as an exercise,
if you need some exercise; otherwise, you can just look at either the Pascal or C version
of Figure 5-11.

Figure 5-11.

(Pascal) global variables, sizes, and locations

Variable

Type

Startingaddress

Ending address

counter

Integer

Sizeinbytes
2

— 2(A5)

— 1(A5)

intResult

Integer

2

—4

—3

int2

Integer

2

—6

—5

intl

Integer

2

—8

—7

long2

Longint

4

—12

-9

long1

Longint

4

—16

—13

sing2

Single

4

— 20

—17

sing]

Single

4

— 24

—21

ext2

Extended

10

— 34

—25

extl

Extended

10

— 44

—35

bool2

Boolean

1

— 45

— 45

bool1

Boolean

1

— 46

— 46

char2

Char

2

— 48

— 47

charl

Char

2

— 50

— 49

string2

string255

256

— 306

—51

256

— 562

— 307

1

— 563

— 563

string]

otring255

sub2

0..100

subl

0..100

1

— 564

— 564

recl

Record

12

— 576

— 565

array

Array

40

— 616

—577

ptr2

Ptr

4

— 620

— 617

ptrl

Ptr

4

— 624

— 621

(C version) global variables, sizes, and locations

Variable

Type

Sizeinbytes

Startingaddress

Ending address

intl

short

2

— 2(A5)

— 1(A5)

int2

short

2

—4

—3

intResult

short

2

—6

—5
Continues

Chapter5

Variable

Type

Sizeinbytes

Examining Compiled Code

Startingaddress

Ending address

counter

short

2

—8

—7

long1

long

4

—12

-9

long2

long

4

— 16

—13

sing]

float

4

— 20

—17

sing2

float

4

— 24

extl

extended

10

— 34

—25

~

—21

ext2

extended

10

— 44

— 35

booll

Boolean

2

— 46

—45

bool2

Boolean

2

— 48

— 47

charl

char

2

— 50

—49

char2

char

2

—52

—-51

string]

Str255

256

— 308

— 53

string2

Str255

256

— 564

— 309

subl

short

2

— 566

— 565

sub2

short

2

— 568

— 567

recl

struct

12

— 580

— 569

arrayl

array

40

— 620

— 581

ptrl

Ptr

4

— 624

— 621

ptr2

Ptr

4

— 628

— 625

Variable packing.

The Pascal compiler will automatically pack some vari-

ables that don’t require a whole word and are adjacent to each other. In
particular, sub1 and sub2 are limited to the range 0 through 100, so each will

fit into a single byte. They'll be packed into a single byte each. Also the two

Booleans will fit into 1 byte each, so they’re packed, too.

The C version is very similar to the Pascal. One difference is that C didn’t

pack the Booleans into a single byte each, as Pascal did. The other difference

is that C allocated space in the exact order that the variables were declared
(for example, long1 followed by long2), while Pascal went right-to-left for
each type (long2 came before long1). Remember that these are what we got
_ with MPW Pascal and C, and that other compilers can be significantly dif-

ferent; there’s nothing inherent in the definition of either language that
dictates how this should be done, and you should never rely on it staying the
same from one version of the compiler to another.

127

128

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Our next assignment:
Pascal:
longl

:

456789012;

{MOVE.L #456789012,

-16(A5)

}

C:
longl =

456789012;

/*MOVE.L #456789012,

-12(A5)*/

Again, the object code is really obvious. The MOVE instruction puts the con-

stant value directly into the variable, which is right where we thought it would be
at — 16(A5) for Pascal and — 12(A5) for C. Note that the MOVE instruction specifies
a long operand (that’s the .L after the MOVE). This is because the value that we’re
moving is a long word, a 4-byte value.
Next, let’s look at a couple of SANE assignments.
Pascal:
extl

:=

1234.5678;

{LEA -—44(A5),

AO

LEA FPConstl,

Singl

:=

104.5

MOVE.L

(Al)+,

MOVE.L

(Al1)+,

MOVE.W

(Al),

Al

(A0)+
(A0Q)+

(AO)

}

{PEA FPConst2
PEA -24(A5)

MOVE #$1010,
_FP68K

-(SP)

}

C:
extl =

1234.5678

/* LEA FPConstl,
LEA -34(A5),

singl

=

104.5;

AO
Al

MOVE.L

(A0)+,

MOVE.L

(A0O)+,

(Al1)+
(Al)+

MOVE.W

(A0)+,

(Al)+*/

/* PEA FPConst2
PEA -20(A5)

MOVE.W #$1010,

-(SP)

_FP68K */

This looks pretty bizarre at first glance. In the first example, we're assigning a
value to a variable of type Extended. The first instruction puts the address of ext1l

into a register. The second instruction loads the address of something called
FPConst1 into another register.

Whatis this

FPConst1 thing? It stands for “floating-point constant.”” Whenever

the compiler encounters string constants or SANE

constants, it embeds them at the

end of the procedure’s code. Here, we're referring to these constants symbolically
with FPConst names. So, FPConst1 is a label that refers to the constant value

Chapter5

Examining Compiled Code

1234.5678 that the compiler has embedded at the end of the code. In the real object

code, a reference to an embedded constant will look something like this:
LEA*+130,A1

The asterisk is an assembler symbol that stands for the current program

counter, so an address like * +130 means “the current location, plus 130 bytes.”
Although the code can be loaded and relocated anywhere in memory, the distance

between this instruction and the constant never changes, so this reference is always
good. This technique is called relative addressing, and you can read more about it
in Appendix A.

What's this code doing with the constant stored at FPConst1? The next three
instructions cause bytes from FPConst1 to be moved into the variable’s space. How

many bytes are being moved? Well, there are two MOVE.L instructions and one
MOVE.W. The long word-sized instructions each move 4 bytes, for a total of 8, and
the word-sized move adds an additional 2 bytes. So the three instructions together

move 10 bytes. This corresponds with what we know about variables of type
Extended: they’re 10 bytes long.

The assignment statement for sing] is a little more puzzling. It begins by using
PEA instructions to push the addresses of another constant (FPConst2) and the

variable sing1 onto the stack. But then, instead of moving bytes from the constant
to the variable, it mysteriously pushes a word (hex $1010), onto the stack and calls

a trap named FP68K. Is this right? Has the compiler gone wacko?

_

Of course not. Here’s the scoop. To maximize accuracy and minimize the
amount of code needed, SANE converts numbers to Extended before doing anything with them. So even if you declare a variable as Single, as we did with sing1,
SANE must convert it to Extended before it can do anything with it. Also, whenever
you use aconstant of any SANE

type, it’s stored in Extended form until it’s assigned

to a variable.

Why ever use Single? Since SANE does all its internal computation in
Extended form anyway, why bother declaring your variables as Single or
Double? What benefit is there? If you need only the accuracy that’s indicated
by single- or double-precision numbers, you save variable storage space by

using Single or Double. Single precision numbers take up 4 bytes; doubleprecision variables use 8 bytes. Extended-precision numbers use up a whopping 10 bytes of memory. So, if you have to use, for example, an array of 1000
values, and you don’t need anything better than single-precision, you can save
6000 bytes by using Single instead of Extended (1000 values times 4 bytes each for
Single compared to 10,000 bytes for 1000 Extended values of 10 bytes each).—

129

130

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

In the case of a constant like 104.5 that we’ve used here, the compiler will
embed a copy of the constant in Extended form at the end of the routine. Before it
can be assigned to the variable, it must be converted to a Single. To do this, the
compiler generates code to call the SANE procedure called FX2S, which means
“convert from Extended to Single.”
SANE procedures are called by pushing a word on the stack that indicates
which call to make and then calling the single trap that dispatches all SANE

calls to

the ROM. We can see this in the object code: first, a word is pushed into the stack
followed by an _FP68K. The word, $1010, is secret code for FX2S, so this calling
sequence will cause SANE to convert the Extended constant stored at FPConst2

into a Single and to put that Single into sing1.

Figuring SANE secret codes.

that indicates a SANE

Officially,the word that’s pushed on the stack

functionis called an opword. SANE computes the

opword by adding together a format code and an operation code. The format
code indicates whether a valueis Single, Double, Extended, or another SANE
type. For example, the format code for Single is $1000. The operation code

_ indicates what function
is being called; the operation code that means “con-

vert from Extended” is $10. By adding these together, we come up with the
opword $1010, which was pushed on the stack to indicate a “convert from

Extended to Single” call to SANE. This information is definitely for fanatics

and language implementors only, since most languages have SANE built in
and you'll never have to know this. Many assemblers even define macros for
the SANE calls. If you're really interestedin this sort of stuff, you can read all

about itin the Apple | Numerics Manual.

Now let's look at assignments to the sub variables.

Pascal:
subl

:=

42;

sub2

:=

subl

*

3;

{

MOVE.B #42,

{

MOVE.B

-564(A5)}

-564(A5),

DO

EXT.W DO

MULS.W #3,

CHK.W #100,
MOVE.B

DO,

DO

DO
—563(A5)}

Chapter5

Examining Compiled Code

-566(A5)

*/

C:
subl

=

42;

sub2

=

subl

/*MOVE.W #42,
*

3;

/*MOVE.W -566(A5),

DO

EXT.L DO
MOVE.L

DO,

D1

ADD.L DO,

DO

ADD.L D1,

DO

MOVE.W DO,

-568(A5)

*/

If you'll recall, these variables in Pascal were declared as subranges of 0 to 100.
This means that the compiler will make sure that no values outside this range are

put into the variables. This is called range checking. There’s a compiler option that
controls range checking: putting $R — in your source turns range checking off, and
$R-+ turns it on. If you don’t specify this option at all, the compiler will do range
checking on your subrange variables. In C, nothing like this will happen, and the
variables will be treated as ordinary shorts.

The first subrange assignment is pretty simple. It works just like an assignment
to an ordinary integer. Since we're assigning a constant, the compiler can check the

constant to see if it exceeds the allowable range. If it does, the compiler stops
compiling and reports a “Value out of range” error. In this case, the value 42 is
within the range, so we get a nice, simple MOVE.B #42.

The Pascal assignment to sub2 is much more interesting for us compiler fans. It
does a lot more than just put the value into the variable’s space in memory. What's
it up to? In this assignment, we’ve got an expression on the right side, which means

that at compile time the compiler has no easy way of knowing if the value will be in

range or not. It must generate code that will do the actual checking at run time.
Let’s take a look at it.

The first instruction loads the value of sub1 into register DO. The next two

instructions multiply the value by 3. Now the value is ready to be assigned to sub2.
But wait! First, we have to make sure that it hasn’t gone outside the specified
subrange.
This check is performed by yet another magic 68000 instruction, CHK. This

instruction compares a value in a register to a specified “boundary” value. In this
case, we’re comparing the newly multiplied value in DO to the boundary value of
100. If the check fails and the value is out of range, the microprocessor generates a
range check error, which on the Macintosh is reported as a system error 5. In this

case, of course, we humans can see that sub1*3 will be 42 * 3, or 126 for you
nonmathematical types, which certainly exceeds the subrange boundary of 100, so
we'd get a system error 5.
However, the compiler doesn’t look at it that way. When it compiles this line,

it’s not looking at the previous line that set the value of sub1. In fact, it assumes no
knowledge at all of the values of any variables already specified. Instead, it relies on

131

132

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

the CHK instruction to perform a range check at the time the code is executed.
Remember that if the CHK instruction fails, a system error 5 will occur.

After the range check is performed by the CHK instruction, the last instruction
moves the computed value from D0 into the variable at —563(A5). This takes care
of the assignment.

There are a couple of interesting differences in the C version. First of all, since
the variables aren’t subranges, they don’t fit into bytes, so the MOVE instructions

move a whole word (MOVE.W) instead of just a byte (MOVE.B). Also, note that the
C compiler used an entirely different algorithm to do the multiplication in the
assignment to sub2. Instead of using the microprocessor’s MUL (multiply) instruction, it performed the multiplication by simply adding the value to itself three
times. This is because the MUL instruction on 68000-family processors is notori-

ously slow, often ten times as slow as an ADD instruction. The C compiler, knowing
this, used an additional MOVE and two ADDs instead of the MUL. This makes code
that’s slightly larger,but faster. You'll see more examples of this whenever you look
at the object code for a multiplication.
A couple more easy ones:
Pascal:
booll

:=true;

{

Charl

:=

{ MOVE.W #120,

‘x’;

MOVE.B #1,

-46(A5)}

-50(A5)}

C:
booll

= true;

charl

=

x;

/* MOVE.B #1,

-46(A5)

*/

/* MOVE.W #120,

-50(A5)

*/

The first assignment reveals that the Pascal compiler uses the value 1 to indicate “true” in BOOLEAN variables. You get a pat on the back if you guessed that
zero represents “false.” In Pascal, the Boolean type is built-in, but not in C. Apple’s

header files for MPW C include these declarations:
enum

{false,true};

typedef

unsigned char Boolean;

This effectively gives C a Boolean type that works like Pascal’s.
The assignment to char] is pretty simple, too. The compiler figures out that the

character ‘x’ has ASCII code 120 and simply puts that value into the variable’s space
in memory.

You might notice that the C and Pascal code that’s produced for these statements is exactly the same. They both use the same technique to put values into the
variables, as you might expect, and it just happens coincidentally that booll and

Chapter5

Examining Compiled Code

charl are stored in the same locations in both versions. Because of the minor
differences in the way the two languages allocate variables (which we’ve been

discussing), these are the only variables that wound up in the same place in this
example of C and Pascal.

Short constants.

Unlike the SANE constant we saw earlier, the ‘x’ is not

placed at the end of the procedure somewhere with a label; instead, it’sjust

coded rightin the MOVEinstruction. Thisis because the constantis 4 bytesor

less and can be specified completely «as an operand in a MOVE instruction.
Since char constants only take upone word, they’re handledin this way.

Next, we'll look at some string assignments in Pascal. We won't look at them in
our C example because most C compilers define strings as arrays of characters, and
they don’t permit assignment to arrays. This wasn’t always the case: earlier ver-

sions of MPWC

defined strings as structures, and assignment to strings was OK.

Anyway, here are the Pascal versions:

Pascal:
stringl

:=

'Musical Youth’;

{LEA -562(A5),
LEA

string2

:=‘The

AO

StrConstl,

Al

MOVE.L

(Al)+,

MOVE.L

(Al)+,

(AQ)+

MOVE.L

(Al)+,

(A0)+

MOVE.W

(Al),

quick brown cow jumped over the

(AO)+

(A0)}

lazy moon.’;

{LEA -—306(A5)
,A0
LEA

StrConst2,Al

MOVEQ #11,D0
Loopl

MOVE.L

DBF

(Al)+,

DO,LOOP1

(A0O)+

}

Both of these statements assign constants to strings. In the first Pascal case, the
constant is 14 bytes long: 13 bytes for the characters in the string, plus 1 byte to hold

the length. The code the compiler produces looks a lot like the assignment to the
EXTENDED variable we saw earlier. First, the address of the variable is put into
register AO, and the address of the constant is put into Al. Then 14 bytes are moved

from the constant into the variable. This is accomplished with three MOVE.L
instructions and one MOVE.W.

133

134

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

The second assignment is handled a bit differently. In this case, we’ve got a
constant that is 47 bytes long (count the characters in the string and then add 1 for
the length byte). If the compiler generated the same kind of code as for the first
assignment, there would be 12 consecutive MOVE.L statements—kind of a waste

of space. So, to be more efficient, the compiler builds a neat little loop.

The code begins by loading the familiar registers AO and Al with pointers to the
variable’s storage and the constant, respectively. It then moves a byte containing
the number of long words to be moved (that is, the length of the constant divided
by 4), less 1, into register DO. It then starts the loop by moving 4 bytes (a long word)
from the source to the destination with a MOVE.L instruction. Since a long word is
the largest operand that an instruction will take, 4 is the most bytes that can be
moved at once.

After this, it executes one of those intricate and clever 68000 instructions, DBF,
which stands for “decrement and branch if false.” It works like this: it first decrements the specified register (in this case, it’s D0). If the result is “false,” that is, if DO

is not less than zero, it branches back to the MOVE instruction. Since DO started at
11, it will execute the MOVE instruction 12 times, once with D0 equal to every value

from 11 down to zero. After the twelfth execution of the loop, the DBF statement
will fall through.
Each pass through the loop moves a long word, or 4 bytes. The string constant
we re moving is 47 bytes long, so this will accomplish the task with an extra unused

byte at the end.
How does the compiler choose whether to use the first method of assigning a
string constant or the second? It simply tries to determine which will take up the
smaller amount of memory. The first technique takes up six instructions; the sec-

ond only uses five. Of course, the first will execute much faster because it doesn’t

have to go through a loop 12 times.
Note that no matter how large the string constant is, up to its maximum of 256

bytes, it will never take more than five instructions to make the assignment. The
compiler will generate “straight-line” code, like the first assignment, if it can do so

in six or fewer instructions; otherwise, it will construct a loop, as in the second

example. This means that constants that take up 16 bytes or less can be assigned in
six instructions: two LEA instructions to load pointers into the registers and four

MOVE.L to move the bytes.

Chapter5

Why doesn’t it call the ROM?

Examining Compiled Code

Back in Chapter 3 we mentioned a nifty

procedure in the Macintosh ROM called BlockMove that is used for moving

bytes around in memory. If the compiler has to move bytes, why doesn’ tit just
call BlockMove? The main reason is that although the Macintosh ROM’s
BlockMove code is fast and efficient, the compiler can get better performance

on moving little hunks of bytes, like constants, by generating its own code.
This technique avoids the overhead associated with a ROM call that comes
from going through the Macintosh trap dispatcher. That overhead alone
would take more time than thesix instructions needed to perform the first
assignment to tring!
oo
|

Let's look at a pointer assignment.
Pascal:
ptrl

:=

@intl;

{

LEA -8(A5),A0
MOVE.L A0,-624(A5)

}

C:
ptrl

=

&intl;

/*

LEA -2(A5),A0

MOVE.L A0Q,-624(A5)

*/

This seems to be pretty straightforward. In the source, we’re saying that we
want ptr1 to be a pointer to int1; that is, we want ptr1 to contain the address of int1.

To do this, the compiler generates two instructions. The first loads a pointer to
intl into register AO, and the second simply moves that pointer into the variable’s

storage at —624(A5). Neat and clean. At first glance, you might think that there
would be a single instruction to accomplish this assignment. There isn’t—what
you
d need is an instruction that moves the address of the first operand into the
memory location specified by the second operand. Maybe on the next-generation
microprocessor. ...

We've now looked at lots of examples of assignment of simple variables, plus
strings, which technically are structured variables. Now that you know all about
simple assignments, let’s look at assignments in structured variables like arrays,
records, and structures. You'll see that they’re pretty similar to their simplevariable counterparts.

The first one we'll look at involves assigning the fields of a record.

135

136

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Pascal:
recl.fint

:=

intl;

recl.fbool

:=

recl.flong

:= 2136528028;

recl.fpoint.v

false;
:=

{

MOVE.W -—-8(A5),-576(A5)

{

CLR.B -574(A5)

{

MOVE.L #2136528028,

}

}

-572(A5)

}

screenBits.bounds.top;
{

MOVE.W -960(A5),-568(A5)

}

C:
recl.fint = intl;

/* MOVE.W -2(A5),-580(A5)

recl.fbool = false;

/* CLR.B -578(A5)

*/

recl.flong = 2136528028;

/* MOVE.L #2136528028,-576(A5)

*/
*/

recl.fpoint.v = qd.screenBits.bounds.top;

/* MOVE.W -954(A5),-572(A5)

*/

The first statement assigns the value of intl to the first field of the record. This

is simply an assignment between two global integers. The value to be assigned is

taken from intl, and it gets stuffed into the first field, recl.fint, with

a MOVE.W

instruction.

For the next assignment, we need to set a Boolean field to false. Booleans
occupy two bytes of memory in C; in Pascal, they just use a byte if they’re packed,

but they normally take up 2 bytes. Even when 2 bytes are used, only the low byte
is significant. So the compiler sets the variable location’s low byte to zero in the best
way it knows how, by doing a CLR.B on it.

The third field that’s assigned is a long integer constant, and it’s pretty ho-hum
stuff that we've already learned. The code simply moves the long word that represents the constant into the correct memory location.

Now that you've been lulled into a sense of false security, it’s time to spring a
surprise on you. The next assignment statement appears at first glance to be pretty

simple, just moving a word-sized value, a point, from one place to another. But look
more carefully. What is screenBits.bounds.top?

As you probably know, it’s a QuickDraw global variable. How does the compiler know about it? It knows because you have a statement that says something

like Uses QuickDraw in Pascal, or include QuickDraw.h in C, at the beginning of
your program. This causes the compiler to read in everything that’s defined in

QuickDraw’s interface file, including its global variables and its procedures and

functions. They’re defined just as if they had been part of your source.
But where does the compiler put the QuickDraw global variables? Since

they’re globals, it puts them on the global stack. In MPW Pascal and C, space for the

QuickDraw globals is allocated on the stack after all application globals have been

allocated. There are 206 bytes of QuickDraw global variables, and QuickDraw is the
only piece of the Macintosh ROM that has globals that go on the stack. For your

Chapter5

Examining Compiled Code

edification, Figure 5-12 lists the QuickDraw globals and their locations on the stack.
Since they're allocated after your program’s globals, their actual address will vary.

Figure 5-12.

QuickDraw global variables, sizes, and locations

Variable

Type

Sizein bytes

Starts at

Ends at

thePort

GrafPtr

4

203

206

Offset from
thePort

0

white

Pattern

8

195

202

—8

black

Pattern

8

187

194

— 16

gray

Pattern

8

179

186

— 24

ItGray

Pattern

8

171

178

— 32

dkGray

Pattern

8

163

170

— 40

arrow

Cursor

68

95

162

— 108

screenBits

BitMap

14

81

94

— 122

randSeed

Longint

4

77

80

— 126

4

73

76

— 130

QuickDraw private globals:

wideOpen

Handle

wideMaster

Ptr

4

69

72

— 134

wideData

Region

10

39

68

— 144

renBuf

Handle

4

55

58

— 148

renindex

Integer

2

53

54

— 150

rgnMax

Integer

2

51

52

— 152

playPic

Longint

4

47

50

— 156

playIndex

Integer

2

45

46

— 158

thePoly

Handle

4

41

44

— 162

polyMax

Integer

2

39

40

— 164

patAlign

Point

4

35

38

— 168

fontAdj

Fixed

4

31

34

—172

fontPtr

Ptr

4

27

30

—176

fontData

FMOutPut

26

1

26

— 202

Starting and ending locations are relative to the first (lowest in memory) global. To access
a global from assembler, use the offset from A5 after getting the address of thePort (A5
points to the location that contains thePort’s address).

137

138

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Where to find QuickDraw globals.

Although MPW Pascal and C put them

on the stack below your application’s globals, QuickDraw globals need not be
located there. In fact, they can be allocated anywhere. The only requirement

is that you allocate a space of 206 bytes and then call InitGraf with the address
of the 203rd byte of this allocated space. Huh? Well, InitGraf expects a pointer
to thePort, the first QuickDraw global. Remember that globals are allocated

downward in memory. That means that thePort is at bytes 203 through 206 of
the QuickDraw space; the next global, white, is in bytes 195 through 202, and
so on. Figure 5-12 lists the QuickDraw globals and their relative locations

from the lowest byte of the QuickDraw global area.

The last assignment we'll look at in this chapter is for an array element.
Pascal:
arrayl

[1]

:=

17;

{

MOVE.W #17,-616(A5)

}

C:
/* at start of main()
arrayl

[0]

=

*/

17;

/* LEA -620(A5),A3

*/

/*

*/

MOVE.W #17,(A3)

As we Said earlier, C arrays always start with element zero, and we declared the
Pascal array to have elements 1 through 20. So, these assignments work on the first

element in the array in each language.
The Pascal version here has no surprises (surprise!). Once again, we see that
assigning a value to an element of a structure is pretty much the same as a simple

variable assignment: the immediate value 17 is moved directly into the variable’s

location.
The C version is a little more interesting. At the top of the function, there’s code
that loads the address of the start of the array into register A3. Then, later in the

function, it uses A3 as a pointer to the elements in the array. By using this technique, all references to the array are compiled relative to the pointer in A3, rather

than the A5-relative location as in Pascal.

Chapter5

Examining Compiled Code

Things to remember

¢ Compilers translate source to object code in a predictable way. You can look

at a line of source code and have a good idea what the object code will look

like.
¢ Compilers are generalized. Smart human programmers will write better

assembly language programs than compilers.
e Space for global variablesis allocated on the stack, and each variable takes

up a specific amount of space. Global variables are referred to by negative

references from A5, like this: —xx(A5).

e Space for local variablesis allocated when a procedureis executed and then

released when the procedure finishes. Local variables are stored at a negative offset from A6, like this:—xx(A6).

e Most Macintosh compilers use register A6 and the LINK instruction to
create local stack frames for procedures and the UNLK instruction to
destroy the stack frame.

e Pascal pushes parameters onto the stack left to right, and C pushes parameters from right to left. Most Macintosh C compilers allow you to declare
functions that use the Pascal method so that you can communicate with the
Macintosh ROM. Parameters within a procedure can be found at a positive
offset from A6, like this: xx(A6).
e In Pascal, parameters larger than 4 bytes are passed by pointer, not by
value. In C, arrays are always passed by pointer.
e Assignment statements in high-level languages translate into MOVE
instructions.

139

C

H

A

P

T

E

R

6

More about Compiled Code
In this chapter we'll continue to look at compiled code. We'll see how procedure

and function calls, if statements, case statements, with statements, and for, while,
and repeat loops, are handled. We'll also look at linked routines, see how the jump
table works, find out how to identify unexpected things in your code, and just
generally have a great time.

The variables we’ll use in this chapter are the same ones that were declared in

Chapter 5, so you can refer back there for more information.

Procedure and function calls
Now that we've pretty much covered assignment statements, let’s take a look at
some real live procedure calls. We'll examine both the calling sequence that the

compiler sets up and the actual code in the procedure itself. As usual, we're in for
a few interesting surprises, so don’t go away.
Let’s start with an easy little procedure that simply adds two numbers. We’ll

look at its declaration, a call to the procedure, and the procedure’s code itself.
First, here’s the declaration:
Pascal:
Procedure sumNums

(numl,

num2:

integer;

VAR result:

integer);

141

142

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

C:
void sumNums

(short numl,

short num2,

short

*result);

This routine takes three parameters: two are integers passed by value, and one
is an integer passed by pointer (in Pascal, this is called a variable parameter). In
addition, the routine has no local variables. Its job is simply to add the two integers
passed to it and to return the sum in the third integer passed. Here’s the procedure’s source code:

Pascal:
begin
result

:= numl

+

num2;

end;

C:
{

*result

=

numl

+

num2

}

Not really superhacker-level stuff, admittedly, but it’s better to start off with a
simple one. Now let’s look at source and object code for a call to this routine.
Pascal:
sumNums

(intl,

int2,

intResult);
{

MOVE.W -8(A5),

-(SP)

MOVE.W -6(A5),

—-(SP)

PEA —4(A5)

JSR

SUMNUMS(PC)

}

C:
sumNums

(intl,

int2,

&intResult);

/* PEA -6(A5)
MOVE.W -4(A5),D0

EXT.L DO
MOVE.L

DO,-(SP)

MOVE.W -2(A5),D0
EXT.L DO
MOVE.L

DO,-(SP)

JSR SumNums

(PC)

*/

Chapter6

More about Compiled Code

The calling sequence seems to fall in line with what we've already learned. We
said that Pascal procedure calls push the parameters on the stack in left-to-right

order. To push the first parameter,int1, the compiler just moves the integer from its
global storage location at — 8(A5) onto the stack. The same thing happens for int2,
that is stored at — 6(A5). Remember that the third parameter is a variable parameter.
According to the rules we carefully constructed in the last chapter,variable parameters
are always passed by address. This coincides with what we see here: the PEA — 4(A5)
instruction causes the address of intResult to be pushed on the stack.

Naturally, the C version is quite different. Since C pushes its parameters from
right to left, the C version begins with the last parameter listed and proceeds to the
first. Also, remember that C doesn’t have an equivalent to Pascal’s VAR (variable)
parameter declaration—any parameter that’s going to be passed by pointer has to

be explicitly specified with the indirection operator, an ampersand symbol (&). So,
to get intResult’s address, we use &intResult.

The other big difference is that while Pascal passes integers as words (2 bytes),
C passes all integers (short and long), chars, pointers, and enumerated types as
long-word (4 byte) values. In order to make 2-byte short integers into 4-byte values,
they must be stretched out.

At first, you might think that 2-byte values can be turned into 4 bytes just by
tacking 2 bytes of zeroes onto the front; for example, $6696 becomes $00006696.
This works just fine—as long as the number is positive. If you know assembly

language, or if you've read Appendix A, you know that integers are expressed as

two's complement values, which means that any word greater than $7FFF represents
a negative number; for example, $F3E2 is — 3102. If you just add 2 bytes of zeroes,

you get $0000F3E2, which suddenly isn’t a negative number any more. What can
we do?
Well, what we really want here is to make sure that our 2-byte number’s sign

stays the same as it grows into a long word. In other words, we'd like $F3E2, the
word-sized version of — 3102, to become $FFFFF3E2, the long word that also means
— 3102. Keeping the sign as the number grows is called sign extension, and it’s a trick
that microprocessors know well. The EXT.L D0 instruction that you saw in the pre-

ceding chunk of code is just for that purpose: it turns the integer value in DO intoa long
integer, while respecting its sign.

The actual call to the routine is performed with a JSR instruction. The operand
of the JSR is interesting. JSR SUMNUMS (PC) means “jump to the subroutine at the
offset SUMNUMS from the current program counter.” Another way of putting it is
to say that SUMNUMS is a fixed number of bytes from the current instruction
(because PC represents the current instruction).

Since Macintosh programs can be loaded almost anywhere in RAM, it’s vital
that they have no references to hard addresses in their code. In other words, a program
cannot contain an instruction like JSR 33044, because it has no way of knowing what

will be in that location at run time. Again, the really smart folks who designed the

68000 thought of this, and they came up with a solution: PC-relative addressing.

143

144

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

In this scheme, programs don’t refer to hard memory addresses when branching. Instead, subroutine addresses are expressed as an offset from the current

program counter. Although a code segment can’t be guaranteed of its location in
RAM, it can be sure of a fixed offset between routines. Therefore, PC-relative
addressing does a great job of solving this problem. In fact, most Macintosh assemblers automatically assume PC-relative mode for JSR instructions, since that’s usually what the programmer wants.

When PC-relative addressing doesn’t work.

The PC-relative addressing

technique works great when a routine calls another routine within the same

segment. Calling a routine that’s in another segment presents a problem. Just
think about it: two routines in the same segment can be sure of their relative
location to each other, since the entire segment is loaded and relocated as a
whole. However, two segments don’t have a fixed relation to each other in
memory, since they're loaded and relocated independently. This means that

PC-relative JSRs for cross-segment calls are doomed to fail, since the calling
routine has no idea at compile or assemble time where the called routine is.

Don’t worry about it, though. This problem was realized and solved long
before the first programmer (whoever that was) started working on a Macintosh. The solution involves the creation of a special table of routines’ entry

points. This table is placed at a fixed, well-defined location in memory. When
a routine wants to call a different segment, it simply JSRs to the correct entry

in this table, and the program is dispatched to the new segment. Simple.
You've just learned the basics of the jump table. We'll talk much more about
it later.

Meanwhile, back at the ranch, we were about to examine the code of the
routine itself.

Pascal:
begin
result

{
:=

numl

+

num2;

LINK A6,#0
MOVE.W

12(A6),D0

ADD.W

14(A6),D0

MOVE.L

8(A6),A0

MOVE.W DO, (A0)
end;

UNLK A6
MOVE.L

(SP)+,A0

ADDQ.W #8,SP
JMP

(AQ)

}

Chapter6

*result

=

numl

+

num2;

More about Compiled Code

/*LINK A6,#0
MOVE.L

A3,-(SP)

MOVEA.L
MOVE.W

ADD.W

16(A6),A3
14(A6),D0

10(A6) ,DO

MOVE.W DO,
MOVEA.L
UNLK

RTS:

(A3)

(SP)+,A3

A6

*/

he

Let’s see what's familiar and expected here. First, we see our friend the LINK
A6 instruction. In this case, the operand of the LINK is zero, which means that no

bytes will be reserved on the stack for local variables. Why bother to do the LINK
then? Because the routine still must have access to the parameters passed to it, and

a stack frame built with a LINK

is still the easiest way to do that. In Figure 6-1 you

can see what the stack frame for the Pascal procedure call looks like.
Both the Pascal and C compilers have taken similar approaches of putting the

address of the ultimate destination, the variable named result, into an address register,
accumulating the values into a data register, then storing the total into the variable.
There are some interesting differences. First, the Pascal procedure call pushed
its parameters from left to right, so they’re at 14, 12, and 8 bytes off A6, respectively.

Part of stack
num 1

14
12

num 2

Pointer to result
8

Return address
4

Saved Aé
Aé and SP

Figure 6-1.

Stack frame for sumNums

145

146

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

The C parameters were pushed from right to left, as C likes to do, and remember that

the integers were extended to long words, so they’re at 10, 14, and 16 bytes off A6.
Another difference involves the choice of which address register to use. The
Pascal compiler chose AO, which is a scratch register—that is, routines are allowed
to use it without worrying about what was there before. The C compiler used
register A3, which must be saved and restored to its original contents before leaving
the function. This caused the C version to add two instructions, the ones that move
A3 onto and off of the stack. These instructions could have been eliminated if AO

were used instead of A3. This is the kind of little quirk that usually gets fixed in
compilers before too much time goes by.
The last big difference between the Pascal and C versions involves what hap-

pens when the routine is finished, after the UNLK instruction. As we said earlier,
Pascal procedures are expected to remove their own parameters from the stack

before returning. After the UNLK instruction, the stack still has the parameters, but
the return address, which got pushed by the JSR after the parameters were pushed, is
in the way (check Figure 6-1 again). How does the procedure deal with this?

First, the return address on the top of the stack is saved in register AO (MOVE.L
(SP) + ,A0). Then, the stack pointer is incremented by 8 bytes to get rid of the three
parameters. Finally, the procedure ends by jumping to the return address that’s

been stashed in register AO.
In C, functions don’t have to remove their parameters. Instead, that’s the

responsibility of the function’s caller. So, the C version of sumNums ends much more
cleanly. After the UNLK instruction, there’s simply an RTS to return to the caller.

Make a mess.

We've said that in C, functions don’t remove their own

parameters, but leave it up to their callers to do so. If you look through your

C program’s object code, you'll find that it usually seems that nobody removes
function parameters from the stack. Often, function parameters will be
allowed to pile up, and they won't be removed until there’s quite a collection

of them. Why isn’t this a problem? Well, all it’s doing is leaving old parameters
on the stack, like so many dirty dishes in the sink. This technique may cause
programs to use a little more stack space than they would otherwise require,

but that’s really the only difference.

Now that we’ve mastered a simple procedure call, let’s go completely off the

deep end and play with some pretty complicated calls that show off lots of different
calling conventions. First, let’s declare another routine.

Chapter6

More about Compiled Code

valLong:

longint;

Pascal:
procedure showVall
valSing:
char;

single;

valString:

(valInt:

valExt:

integer;

extended;

valBool;

Boolean;

valChar:

str255);

C:
void showvall

(valInt,

valLong,

valSing,

valExt,

valBool,

valChar, valString)
short valIint;
long valLong;
float valSing;
extended valExt;
Boolean valBool;

char valChar;

Str255 valString;

This procedure is designed to include almost all the simple variable types as
value parameters. Since the calling sequence is so complicated, with seven param-

eters, the procedure’s code itself does nothing at all, just to keep things simple and
almost comprehensible.

Here’s a call to our do-nothing routine that uses all constants as parameters:
Pascal:
showVall

{

(1984,

2129761313,

9995.95,

12347.6683,

false,

push valInt

MOVE.W #1984,

push valLong

MOVE.L #2129761313,

push pointer to valSing

PEA FPConst3

push pointer to valExt

PEA FPConst4

push valBool

CLR.W —-(SP)

push valChar

MOVE.W #75,

push pointer to valString

PEA StrConst3

call procedure showVall

JSR SHOWVAL1

-(SP)

-(SP)

-(SP)
(PC)

}

C:
showVall

K,

(1984,

2129761313,

9995.95,

12347.6683,

false,

Big);

/* push pointer to valString

PEA StrConst3

push valChar

MOVE.L #75,

push valBool

MOVEQ #0,D0

—(SP)

147

148

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

MOVE.L

push valExt

D0O,-(SP)

LEA FPConst3,A0
LEA

10(A0),A0

MOVE.L

-(A0),-(SP)

MOVE.L

-—(A0),-(SP)

MOVE.W -(A0),-(SP)

push valSing

LEA FPConst4,A0
LEA

10(A0),A0

MOVE.L

-—(A0),-(SP)

MOVE.L

-(A0),-(SP)

MOVE.W -(A0),-(SP)

push valLong

MOVE.L #2129761313,-(SP)

push valiInt
call

function

MOVE.L #1984,-(SP)
showVall

JSR showVall

(PC)

*/

The Pascal version is nicely simple and straightforward, and the C version is

only slightly more complicated. In Pascal, each parameter is pushed with a single
instruction. For the integer, long-integer, and character values, a MOVE instruc-

tion is used: MOVE.W for the (word-sized) integer and character, MOVE.L for the

(long word-sized) long integer.
The longer constants, the ones that don’t fit into a single 4-byte operand, are
passed by pointer. For these, the single, extended, and string values, the compiler

has embedded the constant at the end of the procedure and has used the PEA
instruction here to push the address of each constant.
Finally, the compiler has used a trick to push the Boolean constant “false.”
Instead of

aMOVE.W #0, — (A7), we’ve gota CLR.W —(A7). Both of these instruc-

tions accomplish exactly the same result. Is the CLR faster than the MOVE.W?
Evidently the compiler thinks so. The task of finding out if it’s really a faster
instruction is left as an exercise for the reader (have fun!).

Things are pretty much the same in the C version. Of course, the parameters
are pushed from right to left, as always. Pushing the Boolean value is done by first
moving zero into a register, then pushing the register as a long, instead of Pascal’s

single CLR instruction. The most interesting difference in C is that the floating
point numbers are pushed by value rather than by pointer. To do this for each
constant, the address of the value is loaded into register AO; then, the 10 bytes of the

floating point value are moved with three MOVE instructions (two that move 4
bytes each and one that moves 2 bytes).
Finally, after all seven parameters have been pushed on the stack, the routine

is called. Remember that this routine literally does nothing: there’s just a begin and

end in Pascal, and just brackets in C—nothing else. Here’s the source and object
code for this routine:

Chapter6

More about Compiled Code

Pascal:
begin
{create

stack

make valSing

frame

LINK A6,#-266

a

MOVE.L

20(A6),-(SP)

PEA 20

(A6)

single

MOVE.W #$1010,-(SP)
JSR

make

local

copy of valExt

SANE(PC)

MOVE.L
LEA

TST.B

make

local

copy of valString

16(A6),A0

-10(A6),Al1
(AO)

MOVE.L

(AO)

MOVE.L

(A0)+,(Al)+

+,

(Al)+

MOVE.W

(A0),(A1)

MOVE.L

8(A6),A0

LEA -266(A6),Al1
TST.B

(AQ)

MOVEQ #64,D0
MOVE.L

(A0)+,(Al1)+

SUBQ.W #1,D0
BGT.S

*-4}

end;

{standard epilog

UNLK A6
MOVE.L

(SP)+,A0

ADDA.W #22,SP
JMP

{

(A0)}

/* nothing here */};
/* create stack frame
destroy

stack

return to

frame!

caller

LINK A6,

#0

UNLK A6
RTS

Wow! The C version is absurdly minimalist, as you might expect, but look at all
that Pascal code for a procedure that does nothing! What's all this stuff for? Well,
first you may recall that a procedure has to make local copies of any value param-

eters that are more than 4 bytes long. This is so the procedure can change the
parameter without affecting the global variable that was passed in. In this case, the
parameters are all constants that can’t be changed anyway, but the procedure still
has to create the local copies so that the procedure can assign new values to them

locally. Figure 6-2 shows the stack frame for this procedure, and you can use it to
follow what’s going on here.

149

150

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Offset
from Aé

Part of stack

vallnt (1984)

28

valLong

(2129761313)
24
Pointer to valSing
20
Pointer to valExt

16
valBool

14

valChar

12

Pointer to valString
8
Return address
4

Saved Aé

0
Local copy of valExt
(10 bytes)
-10

Local copy of
valString
(256 bytes)
— 266
Figure 6-2.

Pascal stack frame of ShowVall

The first thing that happens, as always, is the LINK instruction. For this procedure, there are 266 bytes allocated on the stack even though there are no local
variables. This stack space is needed for local copies of parameters. So the operand
in the LINK instruction is more than just the number of bytes needed for the local

variables; it’s actually the sum of the local variables plus the local copies of param-

eters. Close enough.
Next the procedure code starts playing around with our single parameter.
First, it pushes the address of the parameter onto the stack; then it pushes the

Chapter6

More about Compiled Code

address of the pointer to the parameter at 20(A6); finally, it pushes the number $1010
on the stack and then calls SANE. What's going on here?
You may have suspected that this little song and dance is related to the fact that

SANE

does allits internal calculations with extended-precision numbers, no matter

whether the numbers are declared as single, double, or extended. This means that
whenever you use a constant for a SANE

variable, an extended constant is embed-

ded in the procedure and then converted to the appropriate type whenever it’s put
into a variable (including a parameter). If you recall, SANE call $1010 is used to

convert from extended to single, which is what we want here.
The intent of the next two operations is more obvious. In these, the procedure

simply has to copy bytes from the constants to the space reserved in the stack frame
for the local copies. To do this, the compiler uses the two variants of byte-moving

code that we discussed earlier in assignment statements.
The first copy is an extended variable, so it’s just 10 bytes. This is easily accom-

plished with two MOVE.Ls and a MOVE.W. In the second case, the procedure
must copya full 256 bytes, so we get a loop instead of straight-line code. The code
moves 64 long words, or 256 bytes, from the address pointed to by 8(A6) to
— 266(A6), the space reserved in the stack frame for the local copy of the constant.

Since you're probably pretty observant, you might have noticed that these
byte-move sequences havea little extra something that the assignment statements

didn’t have. After the source and destination registers are loaded up, and before
any bytes are copied, these’s a TST.B (AO) instruction. Then the copy proceeds.
What's the TST.B for? Well, it sets the 68000’s condition codes according to the
value of the first byte in the source range, which is pointed to by AO. For the

extended constant, this really doesn’t accomplish anything. For the string, this
instruction can be used to determine whether the length of the string is zero; if so,

the byte-moving operation could be skipped. This could be accomplished by putting a BEQ (branch if equal to zero) instruction right after the TST.B. Only one

problem—nothing’s being done in response to the test. This seems to be a halfimplemented feature.
After the local copies of the long value parameters are made, the procedure
would begin executing its code. In our example, the body of the procedure is empty

(just a begin and an end, remember), so all that’s left is for the procedure to clean up
the stack and exit.
The stack-cleaning and exiting is done in the conventional way. First, the
UNLK A6 destroys the stack frame and restores the previous, saved value of A6; the

return address to the caller is saved in AO; the stack pointer is incremented by 22,
since this procedure has 22 bytes of parameters (you can add them up if you want
to double-check the compiler); and the procedure finishes up by jumping back to
the caller, whose address was just saved in AO.

151

152

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

This example of a call to showVal1 used constants for all the parameters. What
if we used variables instead of constants? How would things be different? Let’s take
a look.
Pascal:
showVall

(intl,

longl,

singl,

extl,

booll,

charl,

stringl);

{push intl

MOVE.W —8(A5),-(SP)

pushlongl

MOVE.L -—16(A5),-(SP)

do song-and-dance to push singl

PEA -—24(A5)
PEA -634(A5)

MOVE.W #$100E,-(SP)
JSR

SANE

PEA -—634(A5)

push extl

PEA -—44(A5)

push booll

MOVE.B —46(A5),-(SP)

push charl

MOVE.W -—-50(A5),-(SP)

do song-and-dance to push stringl

LEA -562(A5),A0
MOVE.B

(A0),-(SP)

MOVE.W #255,-(SP)
JSR

% SRCHK

MOVE.L A0,-(SP)

call procedure

JSR SHOWVAL1}

C:
showvall

(intl,

longl,

singl,

/* push pointer to stringl
push

it

booll,

charl,

PEA -52

charl,

but make

extl,

stringl);

(A5)

MOVE.B -50(A5),D0
a

long

first

EXT.L DO
MOVE.L D0,-(SP)

push booll

MOVEQ #0,D0
MOVE.B

make

sure

push

extl

it’s

a

long,

too

-46(A5),D0

MOVE.L D0O,-(SP)
LEA -24(A5),A0
MOVE.L

-—(A0),-(SP)

MOVE.L

—(A0),—(SP)

MOVE.W -—(A0),—-(SP)

Chapter6

song-and-dance

for singl

More about Compiled Code

PEA -—20(A5)
PEA —-18(A6)

MOVE.W #$100E,-(SP)
_FP68K
LEA -8(A6),A0
MOVE.L

-(A0),-(SP)

MOVE.L

-(A0),-(SP)

MOVE.W -(A0),-(SP)

push

longl

MOVE.L

push intl
make

it

a

-12(A5),-(SP)

MOVE.W -2(A5),D0
long

first

EXT.L DO
MOVE.L D0,-(SP)

call

function

showVall

JSR showVall

*/

Once again, there’s more code here than we expected (isn’t there always?). In

the previous example, in which we used constants for all the parameters, the
calling sequence in Pascal was absolute simplicity. Not so this time, as you see.
Although some of the parameters are passed with a single instruction, there is some

extra stuff here. What are the complications that have been introduced by using
variables instead of constants?

First, let’s discuss the way Pascal took care of things. This will take a couple of
pages, so you C fans might want to skip ahead if you don’t want to learn anything
about Pascal. Some of the parameters are passed in an “‘obvious” way. The first two

parameters, intl and long1, are passed with simple MOVE instructions from their
storage locations to the stack. The next parameter is a single, and now we're in
trouble, because it has to be converted to an extended before it can be passed. So we
go through the usual technique to convert it: push its address on the stack,
PEA — 24(A5), followed by an address to put the converted result, PEA — 634(A5),

followed by the appropriate SANE

secret code, which means “convert from single

to extended,’” MOVE.W #$100E (SP), then call the SANE

trap in the ROM, FP68K.

When the SANE routine returns, the converted number will be at — 634(A5), so
we can do a PEA —634(A5) to pass its address to the procedure. But what's this

— 634(A5) location? We said that addresses of the form — X(A5) are global variables;
but if you look backin the preceding chapter at Figure 5-11, which lists all our global
variables and their locations, you'll see that the last one allocated is at — 624(A5). So
what's going on at — 634(A5)?

The answer is this: since the compiler must convert non-extended SANE

types

to extended before passing them to procedures, it needs some space in memory to

put the converted value. Where can it find this space? In the case of a global
variable, the most convenient place is the global stack, just below the application's
global variables. So the compiler reserves space for an extended copy of nonextended parameters on the global stack.

153

154

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

The next three parameters are easy to push—they’re pushovers (sorry). Passing the extended parameter requires that a pointer to it be pushed on the stack and
this is accomplished with a PEA instruction. No conversion is required, since it’s

already an extended. The next two, the boolean and the char, are put on the stack
with MOVE instructions.

Next we have to push the String parameter, and here we get to learn a whole
new game. Before we can pass the string to the procedure, we have to perform a

range check on it; that is, we have to ensure that it’s length hasn’t exceeded the

length specified for this parameter.
This check is accomplished with a little routine called % SRCHK. No, that’s not

a typo. The routine’s name is really percent sign-underscore-SRCHK. This is not a
routine that you write; it’s linked to your program automatically when you run the

linker. Routines that start with this odd prefix are Pascal run-time library routines.
They come from the file called paslib.
As we said, the range-checking routine checks the length of the string against

the parameter’s declared maximum. The calling sequence here first puts the
address of the string into AO and then pushes the string’s length byte, the first byte
in the string, onto the stack, followed by the constant 255. The 255 comes from the
fact that this parameter was declared as type string[255]. After these pushes, the
procedure calls % SRCHK.

From this calling sequence, we can infer that %_SRCHK expects two values on
the stack and performs a range check (CHK instruction, remember?) to ensure that

the first parameter is less than or equal to the second one; in this case, that means
checking to see that the length byte of the string does not exceed 255. None of this
range-checking stuff happens if we’ve turned off the compiler’s range-checking
option.

The showVall procedure will be expecting a pointer to the string on the stack,

since Pascal strings are always passed by pointer. After the range-check subroutine
returns, presumably having removed its two parameters from the stack but not

having modified any registers, the calling code pushes A0 on the stack. Since AO still
contains a pointer to the string, this will serve to pass the string parameter.

You might also have realized that there really doesn’t have to be a check here.
Since the string can be 255 bytes long, and the maximum value that you can putin
a byte anyway is 255, these’s no way the CHK could fail. Apparently, this is a
compiler optimization that could be added.

Chapter6

No branch after the range check.

More about Compiled Code

You might be surprised at first to see that

the range-check subroutine apparently doesn’t return a result indicating
whether the check succeeded or failed, since there’sno BNE

or something to

an error-handling routine. Well, remember that the range checkis performed
with a CHK X, Y

instruction. If the CHK instruction resultsin a value out of

range (if the second operand is larger than the first), the microprocessor
generates an exception, which becomes a'system error on the Macintosh. You

can trap such errors with the System Error Handler’s resume procedure,
which you can read aboutin Inside Macintosh, or by directly stealing the CHK

interrupt vector at location $18, which youcan read aboutin the Motorola
68000 manual.

ele

Now that we’ve seen the Pascal version, let’s look at how muchC differs. Once
again, most of the differences are pretty trivial: the parameters are pushed left-to-

right, the integer, char, and Boolean values are extended to long words before
they're pushed, and the extended variable is passed by value and not by pointer.
The interesting differences are in the float (sing1l) and the string (string1)
parameters. The difference in sing] is subtle: C, like Pascal, converts the value to

extended before pushing it. The difference is that Pascal made its space for the

extended copy of sing1 on the global stack, while C reserves space in the local stack
frame, off A6. Definitely a nit, but still worth noting.

Pushing the string parameter is not much different in C. The main difference is
that our C version lacks the lovely range-checking code that we observe in Pascal.
Because MPW C

defines strings as arrays, and C arrays are always passed by

pointer, our function call simply pushes the address of string1 onto the stack.
After all the SANE-converting and range checking are done, we can call the
routine with a JSR. You can clearly see how using parameters that are variables

compares with using constant parameters. For some parameters, there’s virtually
no difference: just a single MOVE instruction in either case. However, when the

parameter is a string or a SANE

type other than extended, there’s code necessary to

do some extra work.

Once again, it’s important to remember that the compiler generates all this

unexpected special code for you automatically. We're studying it here not to learn
how to write a compiler, but to understand what we're looking at when we're
debugging programs. Don’t worry if you don’t remember every nuance and rule of
parameter passing—that’s the compiler’s job. Your job is to able to look at the code

put out by the compiler and say, “Oh yeah, I see what's going on here.”

155

156

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Debugging compilers. J almost hate to point this out, but compilers are big,
complex programs, and they can have bugs, too. I’m not talking about the

compiler generating two instructions where one would do. I mean real-live,
rip-roaring, break-my-program bugs. Bugs like this tend to be rare, especially
in mature products like the MPW compilers, which have been around for
many years, but they do happen.

As you get better and better at this, you may come to a point where you're
absolutely sure that you’re doing everything right and that you've found a
place where the compiler goofed and generated bad code. If this happens,
you should contact the software manufacturer,who should be able to tell you
if you've got a real bug or to tell you why you're wrong. Finding a real bugin
a compileris always a thrill (unless you've been\ going nuts for a week trying
to find it).

Now that we've learned all there is to know about passing simple variable-type
parameters, let’s expand our knowledge and look at structured variables. We'll
declare a new routine:
Pascal:
procedure

showVal2

myArrayType;

(valRec:

valPtr:

myRecType;

valArray:

Ptr);

C:
void showVal2

(myRecType valRec,

myArrayType valArray,

Ptr

valPtr);

This procedure takes three parameters. Two of these are structures, a record of
type myRecType and an array of type myArrayType, and the third is a pointer of
type ptr. Since the record and the array are more than 4 bytes long, in Pascal,
pointers to these structures will be passed to the procedure, and the procedure will
make local copies of the structures.
Let’s now look at the calling sequence created bya call to this routine.
Pascal:
showVal2

(recl,

{push

arrayl,

pointer

push pointer
push

ptri

call

the

to
to

ptrl);

recl

PEA —-576(A5)

arrayl

PEA -616(A5)
MOVE.L

procedure

JSR

-624(A5),-(A7)

SHOWVAL2
}

Chapter6

/* at start of main
showVal2

(recl,

()

arrayl,

LEA -—676(A5) ,A4*/
ptrl);

/* push ptrl

MOVE.L

push pointer to arrayl
push

recl

More about Compiled Code

structure

-622(A5),-(SP)

MOVE.L A4,-(SP)

LEA -626(A5),A0
MOVE.L

-(A0),-(SP)

MOVE.L

-(A0),-(SP)

MOVE.L

—(A0),-(SP)

JSR

showVal2

*/

There's nothing unexpected or surprising here. In Pascal, pointers to the

record and the array are pushed onto the stack with PEA instructions. Then the

value of ptr1 is pushed in from its location at — 624(A5). AJSR instruction completes
the calling sequence. The C code is the same, except for the left-to-right ordering,
the fact that recl is pushed as a structure instead of a pointer, and the special
handling of array1, loading its address into a register.
Now let's look at the code of the routine itself. You'll find that it’s our usual
do-nothing, empty procedure.
Pascal:
begin
LINK A6,#-52

{make

stack

frame

make

local

copy of

recl

MOVE.L

16(A6),A0

LEA —12(A6),Al
TST.B

make

local

copy of

arrayl

(AO)

MOVE.L

(A0)+,(A1)+

MOVE.L

(A0)+,(Al1)+

MOVE.L

(A0)+,(A1)+

MOVE.L

12(A6),A0

LEA -52(A6),Al
TST.B

(AO)

MOVEQ #10,D0
MOVE.L

(A0O)+,(Al1)+

SUBQ.W #1,D0
BGT.S

*-4}

end;
{tear

down

Save

return

pop

off

12

go back to

stack

frame

address

bytes

caller

of

UNLK A6
MOVE.L

params

(SP)+,A0

ADDA.W #12,SP
JMP

(A0)}

157

158

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

C:
{

/* nothing here */

};

/* create stack frame
destroy stack
return

to

LINK A6,

frame

caller

#0

UNLK A6
RTS

* /

Once again, there’s nothing going on here that we haven't talked about

already. The C version is almost nothing, just like the previous example. The Pascal
version goes through a few housekeeping operations. First, the stack frame is

created with a LINK instruction. Next, the local copy of recl is made in the usual
way. You may remember that way back toward the beginning of Chapter 5 we

figured out that type myRecType took up 12 bytes. So the procedure here copies 12
bytes into the local stack frame with three MOVE.L instructions.

Next, the procedure has to make a local copy of array1. Since this array is 40
bytes long, the local copy is made by looping ten times, copying 4 bytes each time.

If the procedure had any statements in its body, they would be executed at this
point, but it ain’t got no body, so the next thing that happens is the procedure’s
epilog. This code, which by now should be very familiar to you, unbuilds the stack
frame, saves the return address, increments the stack pointer past the 12 bytes of
parameters, and jumps through register AO back to the caller.

Congratulate yourself.

We've now covered so much information that we

were able to step through that last call without having to learn a single new

fact. If you've been keeping up, you should feel a great sense of accomplishment now. Please go reward yourself with anew compact disc, something to

eat, or some other treat of your choice.

_

We've saved the best for last. So far all the parameters we've looked at have
been value parameters. None of the parameters to either of the procedures we’ve

studied so far have been variable (VAR) parameters. Earlier in this chapter we said
that VAR parameters are always passed by pointers. In C, these are just the parameters that are passed with an ampersand (&) in front of them. Let’s declare a routine

that takes some parameters passed by pointers.
Pascal:
procedure

showVarl

(VAR varInt:

longint;

VAR varSing:

SINGLE;

BOOLEAN;

VAR

char;

varChar:

integer;

VAR varExt

VAR

:

varString:

VAR varLong:

EXTENDED;
str255);

VAR varBool:

Chapter 6

More about Compiled Code

C:
void

showVarl

(short

*varInt,

extended

Str255

long

*varExt,

*varLong,

Boolean

float

*varBool,

*varSing,
char

*varChar,

*varString);

It may look complicated, but we'll dissect it completely in a few minutes. This
procedure is basically the same as showVal1, which we played with earlier, except

that all the parameters here are explicitly passed by pointer instead of by value.
Now let's take a look at a sample call to the routine.

Pascal:
showVarl

(intl,

longl,

pointer to

singl,

extl,

booll,

charl,

intl

PEA -8(A5)

push pointer to

longl

PEA

-16(A5)

pointer to

-24(A5)

{push

singl

PEA

push pointer to

extl

PEA

-44(A5)

push pointer

to

booll

PEA

-46(A5)

push pointer

to

charl

PEA

-50(A5)

push pointer

to

stringl

PEA

-~562(A5)

JSR

SHOWVAR1}

&extl,

&booll,

push

call

(yawn)

procedu re

stringl);

C:
showVarl

(&intl,

&longl,

&singl,

/* push pointer to stringl
push pointer to
push pointer to

PEA

booll

PEA -46(A5)

PEA —-34(A5)

push pointer to

singl

PEA

-20(A5)

push pointer

longl

PEA

-12(A5)

intl

PEA

—2(A5)

JSR

showVarl

to

push

pointer to

call

function

&stringl);

-50(A5)

charl

push pointer to extl

&charl,

PEA -308(A5)

*/

Didn't I say that I saved the best for last? See how easy this stuff is? Since all the
parameters are VAR (in Pascal) or & (in C), the routine wants a pointer to each

parameter to be pushed. This is easy. In turn, a pointer to each parameter is pushed
with a PEA instruction, and the routine is called with a JSR, as usual.

159

160

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Noconstants.

Ofcourse, the caller can’t use a constant where a VAR param-

eter is required; it must be a real live variable.

Here’s the code of the procedure showVar1:
Pascal:
begin
{create

stack

frame

LINK A6,#0

nothing else to do!}
end;

{destroy stack
Save
pop

return
off

frame

UNLK A6

address

MOVE.L

parameters

(SP)+,A0

ADDA.W #28,SP

jump back to caller

JMP

(A0Q)}

C:
{/* nothing here,

again */

/* create stack frame
destroy stack

frame

return to caller

};
LINK A6,

#0

UNLK A6
RTS

*/

Nothing there! Our procedure with no source has finally produced no object
code! Since all the Pascal parameters are VAR, that means that the procedure has

been given direct access to the global variables, and there’s no need to make local
copies of anything. So the procedure simply creates the stack frame, does its thing

(which, in this example, is nothing), and then goes through the standard epilog. In
C, as in our previous functions, the code just sets up and destroys the stack frame,

then returns.

Next let’s look at a routine with pointers to structured variables as parameters.
Pascal:
procedure

showVar2

myArrayType;

VAR

(VAR varRec:

varPtr:

myRecType;

VAR varArray:

ptr);

C:
void showVar2
*varPtr);

(myRecType

*varRec,

myArrayType varArray,

Ptr

Chapter6

More about Compiled Code

This routine is the same as showVal2 except that all the parameters here are,
passed by pointer. Notice that the varArray parameter in the C version is not

declared with an asterisk, the pointer symbol. That’s because C always passes
arrays by pointer anyway. Here’s a call to this routine:
Pascal:
showVar2

(recl,

arrayl,

ptrl);

{push pointer to recl

PEA -576(A5)

push pointer to arrayl

PEA -616(A5)

push pointer to ptrl

PEA -624(A5)

call procedure

JSR SHOWVAR2

}

C:
showVar2

(&recl,

arrayl,

&ptrl);

/*push pointer to ptrl

PEA -622(A5)

push pointer to arrayl

MOVE.L A4,-(SP)

push pointer to recl

PEA —638(A5)

call

JSR showVar2

function

*/

Again, everything here follows the rules we've already learned. And now,
here’s the code of the routine itself:
/

Pascal:
begin
{create

stack

frame

LINK A6,#0

nothing else to do!}
end;

{destroy stack
save

return

pop off

{

frame

address

parameters

UNLK A6

MOVE.L

jump back to caller

JMP

/* still nothing here */

}3

/* create stack frame
destroy stack

frame

return to caller

(SP)+,A0

ADDA.W #12,SP
(A0)}

LINK A6,

#0

UNLK A6

RTS

*/

161

162

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Just as in the previous example, the procedure doesn’t have to do any setup at
all except for the LINK instruction. There are no local copies to be made.

These examples raise several questions. Passing parameters by pointer for
variables that are longer than 4 bytes is more efficient than passing them by value.
Whatare the advantages and disadvantages of each method? A big record or struct
parameter passed by pointer will require less stack space than one passed by value,
in Pascal because the procedure won't have to make a local copy, and in C because

only 4 bytes (the pointer) will have to be passed instead of the whole thing. Plus, in
Pascal, there’s less obscure code to dig through when you're debugging if there’s

no local-copy making, and the procedure will execute a little faster because it'll
have less to do.

The obvious disadvantage of passing parameters by pointer is the chance of

side effects; that is, a global variable may get changed when you didn’t want it to.
In fact, this is one of the reasons for the invention of value parameters in the first

place. So if you start using lots of pointers to speed things up and to save stack
space, that’s fine, but be careful of accidentally blowing up the value of one of your
globals. You decide.

Conditional statements
Now that we know what procedure and function calls look like, let’s take a guided
tour of some standard statements used in Pascal and C. We'll see how each of these
statements shows up in object code.

The first set of statements we’ll look at are the conditional statements. These
statements include if, case, and switch.

Let's start with some if statements. Here’s the source and object code for one
example:

Pascal:
if
{

intResult
compare

branch

<>

{

int2

not

else

{

:=

equal

branch
int2

assign
next

to

17

to

else

if

fall

into

then

ahead

otherwise,

then

17

intResult

CMPI.W #17,-4(A5)

equal

BEQ.S Label3

code

}

3
to

17,

around
:=

assign

int2

MOVE.W #3,-6(A5)

else

BRA.S

Label4

}

294;

int2

Label3

MOVE.W #294,-6(A5)

statement

Label4

o

8

}

Chapter6

More about Compiled Code

C:
if

(intResult

/* put 17

!=

compare

it to

branch ahead

otherwise,
{

int2

=

17)

into register

3;

MOVEQ #17,D0

intResult

CMP.W -6(A5),D0

to

else

if

equal

fall

into

then

BEQ.S Label3

code

*/

}

/* not equal to 17,

assign int2

MOVE.W #3,-4(A5)

branch around else

BRA.S Label4

*/

else

{

int2

=

294;

}

/* assign int2
next statement

Label3

MOVE.W #294,-4(A5)

Label4

oe

*/

This if statement compares the global variable intResult to 17. If it is not equal
to 17, int2 is assigned the value 3; otherwise, int2 gets 294. The assembly language

strategy used by the compiler is very straightforward.
First, there’s an instruction that compares intResult’s value to 17 (C puts 17 into

a register first) and sets the microprocessor’s condition codes register (CCR) accordingly. In particular, the zero (Z) flag of the CCR is set if this comparison is true (if
intResult is equal to 17) and cleared if the comparison fails (if intResult is not equal
to 17).

After this comparison, there’s a branch-if-equal (BEQ) instruction. Whether
this branch is taken depends on the state of the Z flag. If it’s set, the branch will be
taken; otherwise, it will not be taken. The destination of the branch, Label3, is
simply a name that we’ve made up to mark the else code; in your object code, this
would be expressed as a PC-relative value (that is, some number of bytes relative to
the current location).

If the compare instruction finds that intResult is equal to 17, the Z flag will be set
and the BEQ will be taken, skipping to the else clause, just as we wanted. See how
that works? The compiler’s general technique on if statements is this:
1.

Dothe comparison, usually with a CMP instruction, to set the condition codes.

2.

Use a Bcc (branch-on-condition-code) instruction to branch to the else part of
the statement (or to the next statement, if there’s no else) if the values compared don’t have the desired relationship.

3.

Fall through into the then part if the branch is not taken. If there’s an else part,
branch around it to the next statement.

The mnemonic Bcc is a shorthand for any one of several different branch
instructions. These include BEQ for “branch if equal,” BNE for “branch if not
equal,” and a whole bunch more. There’s a listing of the most common conditional
branches in Figure 6-3.

163

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Figure 6-3.

Conditional branches and logical operators

Branch instruction

C

A

nN

(branch if not equal)

BEQ (branch if equal)

V

BNE

Pascal

AV

BGE (branch if greater than or equal)

A

MV

BLE (branch if less than or equal)

BGT (branch if greater than)

BLT (branch if less than)

VA

VA

164

Big science. Note thatinthis schemethe branchistaken if the comparison

fails; thatis, the branch skips around the then part of the statement. This
means that the branch instruction that tests the condition codes must actually

test theinverse of the desired condition. For example,in thecase we looked
at, the test we were performing was inequality (intResult <> 17), but the
branch was taken if it found equality (BEQ). You'll see thisin our next exam-

ple andin your own code. Figure 6-4 gives an example of how this principle

works.

Figure 6-4.

If statement logic

Source code

Object code

if IntResult < > 17

Compare intResult to 17.
Are they equal?
Yes, jump to else part
No, fall into then part

then int2 := 3

then part: Assign 3 to int2; jump past else

else int2 := 294;

else part: Assign 294 to int2

Here’s another if statement.
Pascal:
if
{

intResult
compare

=

8

intResult

if not equal,
otherwise,

to

8

CMPI.W #8,-4(A5)

branch ahead

fall

into

then

BNE.S Label5
code

}

then begin

int2
{

:=

assign

12;
value

to

int2

MOVE.W #12,-6(A5)

}

Chapter6

intl

{

:=

More about Compiled Code

int2;

assign value

to

intl

MOVE.W -6(A5),-8(A5)

}

end;

{

next

statement

Label5

eee

}

C:
if

(intResult ==

8)

/* put 8 into register
compare

if

it to

not equal,

otherwise,
{

int2

=

fall

MOVEQ #8,D0

intResult

CMP.W -6(A5),D0

branch ahead
into

then

=

MOVE.W #12,-4(A5)

*/

MOVE.W —4(A5),-2(A5)

*/

int2;

/* assign value to int2
next

Label5

*/

12;

/* assign value to intl
intl

BNE.S

code

statement

Label5

eee

}
This statement is similar to the first one, except that the comparison is for

equality instead of inequality, and the body of the then part of the statement is a

compound statement; that is, it has a begin and an end in Pascal, and curly braces
in C. This really doesn’t make any difference to the form of the if statement; it just
makes sure that the then part gets executed if the conditions are right. Also, note
that this statement has no else; if the if is false, there’s a branch to the next statement.

For this if statement, the first step is comparing the value of intResult to the
constant value 8. This sets the condition codes according to the comparison. Then
the BNE instruction skips to the next statement if the value of intResult was not
equal to 8. If intResult was 8, the compound statement that makes up the then part

is executed; that is, the two assignments are performed.
Next let’s look at a fancier kind of conditional statement: Pascal’s case and C’s
switch.

Pascal:
case
{

intl

of

get value

is

it a

yes,

of

intl

in

DO

MOVE.W -8(A5),D0

1?

branch

not

1,

if

zero,

SUBQ.W #1,D0
to

case

subtract

BEQ.S

1 more

branch to case

subtract

1

if

it’s case

zero,

1

again

Casel

SUBQ.W #1,D0
2

BEQ.S Case2
SUBO.W #1,D0

3

BEQ.S Case3

165

166

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

SUBQ.W #1,D0

subtract yet again
and branch to case
one

last

l:
{

1-5,

int2
put

2:
{

intl
put

:=

{

booll

BRA.S

Casel

:=

Case2

statement

in DO
1

:=

99

it’s

of

{

Label6

Case3 MOVE.B -~—46(A5),D0

DO,

negating

it

EORI.B #1,D0

in booll

MOVE.B

BRA.S

D0,-46(A5)

Label6

99;

in

subl

Case4 MOVE.B #99,-564(A5)

a constant,

so no range check

is

needed

jump away
5:

}

MOVE .W #906,-6(A5)
BRA.S

jump ahead
subl

Label6

NOT booll;

put booll

put

}

MOVE.W #5,-6(A5)
BRA.S

in intl

put NOT booll

{

Label6

906;

flip bit

4:

Case4

BEQ.S Case5

statement

statement

jump to next
3:

5

next

int2
next

906

BEQ.S

5;

in
to

zero

SUBQ.W #1,D0

zero to case
branch to

:=

5

jump

if

subtraction

branch if
not

4

BRA.S

recl.fint

:=

3

put

int2

in DO

add

5

DO

to

*

(5

+

Label

6

}

int2);

Case5 MOVE.W -6(A5),D0

ADDQ.W #5,D0

multiply the whole
put the result

schmeer by 3

MULS #3,D0

into recl.fint

MOVE.W D0,-576(A5)_

}

end;
{

next

statement

Label6

C:
Switch

(intl)

/* get value of intl
is

it

yes,

a

1,

if

zero,

to

zero,

subtract

last

not

if

1-5,

1

1

BEO.S

more

1

2

again

BEQ.S

Case2

SUBQ.W #1,D0

it’s

case

yet

again

case

3

BEQ.S

zero to
to

Case3

SUBQ.W #1,D0
4

if

zero

subtraction

branch

Casel

SUBQ.W #1,D0

branch to case

and branch to

branch

case

subtract

subtract

one

MOVE.W -2(A5),D0

SUBQ.W #1,D0

branch

not

if

in DO

1?

case
next

BEO.S

Case4

SUBQ.W #1,D0
5
statement

BEQ.S

Case5

BRA.S

Label6

*/

Chapter6

{

case

l:

/* put 5

int2

=

More about Compiled Code

5;

in int2

Casel MOVE.W #5,—-4(A5)

*/

break;

/*

jump out of switch statement
case

2:

intl

=

BRA.S Label6

*/

Case2 MOVE.W #906,-2(A5)

*/

BRA.S Label6

*/

906;

/* put 906 in intl
break;

/*

jump out of switch statement
case

3:

booll

=

!

(booll);

/* put zero in DO
is

booll

yes,

set

change

Case3 MOVEQ #0,D0

false?
DO

to

TST.B —46(A5)
-l

SEQ

sign of DO

put result

DO

NEG.B DO

into booll

MOVE.B D0,-46(A5)

*/

BRA.S Label6

*/

break;

/*

jump ahead
case

4:

subl

=

99;

/* put 99 in subl

Case4 MOVE.W #99,-566(A5)

break;

/*

jump away
case

5:

BRA.S Label6

recl.fint =

3

*

(5

+

/* put int2 into register Dl
add 5
make

Case5 MOVE.W -—4(A5),D1

to it
it

copy it
add DO

a

ADDQ.W #5,D1

long value

EXT.L Dl

into register DO
to itself

add to Dl

*/

int2);

MOVE.L D1,D0

(multiplies by 2)

(now multiplied by 3)

ADD.L D1,D1
ADD.L DO,D1

put result into recl.fint

MOVE.W D1,-580(A5)

*/

break;

}
/*next statement

Label6

...

*/

This statement branches to one of several different locations (called case

labels) depending on the value of intl, which is called the case selector. The
strategy used is this:
1.

2.

Begin by putting the value of the case selector into a register.

Subtract from this the value of the first case label. In other words, if the first case
label used is 1, subtract 1. If the result is zero, we know that the case selector was
a one, so branch to the first case label.

3.

If the result was not zero, subtract again. The amount to subtract is the difference between the first and second case labels. If the result of the subtraction is
zero, branch to the second case label.

167

168

PART TWO

4.

DEBUGGING

Keep subtracting and checking for zero, branching if zero is obtained, until the
maximum possible case label value has been tested. In other words, if the
highest case label used is 16, keep subtracting until you've subtracted a total of
16 from the original case selector.

5.

Following the last subtraction and BEQ, insert a BRA (branch always) to the
next statement, or, if the Pascal case statement has an otherwise clause or the C

switch statement has a default label, branch to it. This takes care of case selectors that don’t match any case label.

There’s a slight difference in the way Pascal and C work in this example. When
you use a case statement in Pascal, control automatically jumps to the end of the

statement after a particular case is taken. In C, though, execution normally falls
through to the next case, unless there’s a break statement. So, to make these two
statements work the same way, we’ve added a break at the end of each case.

Alternate form of statement.

If there are a lot of case labels, some compilers
will produce a different-looking case statement. Instead of straight-line subtraction from the case selector and branches, the alternate form builds a table
of dispatch addresses to the various case labels. It takes the case selector and
uses it to select the appropriate address from the table, and then jumps to that

address. This is similar iin
n principle to the erates used iin\ copying
ae for

cient methoddependingon the situation.
Improving onthe ompiler. ‘Bytnow you'sve probably noticed’that thereare

places where the compiler appears to be doing somesilly,inefficient thingsin
its code generation. We discussed earlier how compilersaren’t always able to
see the same optimizations that humans do, even if they're pretty obvious. In
the preceding case statement, you may have noticed that case 3 in the Pascal
version, which assigns NOT bool! to booll, uses three instructions where a

single instruction would suffice—EORI.B#1,—46(A5). Figuring out how to

improve on code that compilers generate is a lot of fun and is a characterbuilding experience.

Repetitive statements
Another important group of high-level language statements is the repetitive statements, also known as looping statements. In C and Pascal, the looping statements
are while and for; Pascal also uses repeat, and C also uses do. We'll look at examples of

each of these.
First, let’s look at a sample Pascal repeat statement, along with a C while
statement that does pretty much the same thing.

Chapter6

More about Compiled Code

Pascal:
repeat

int2

:=

int2

{

5

in DO

put

multiply
put

until

the

int2

{is

5;
Label7

it

by

int2

result

back

>=

int2
yes,

*

MOVEQ #5,D0
MULS

into

int2

-6(A5),D0

MOVE.W D0O,-6(A5)

}

2000;

still

less

branch

to

than 2000?

start

of

CMPI.W #2000,-6(A5)

loop

BLT.S Label7

}

C:
do

{

int2

*=

5;

}

/* put int2

in DO

Label7 MOVE.W -—4(A5),D0

C avoids MUL at all costs

EXT.L DO

copy it

MOVE.L DO,D1

into Dl

shift by 2

(multiplies by 4)

add to Dl

(now multiplied by

put result
while

(int2

<

into

LSL.L #2,D0
5)

int2

MOVE.W D0,-4(A5)

* /

2000);

/* Is int2 still less than 2000?
Yes,

ADD.L D1,D0

branch to

start of

loop

CMPI.W #2000,-4(A5)
BLT.S Label7

*/

When you use Pascal's repeat or C’s do... while, the statements in the loop are
always executed once before any test to end the loop. As you see here, the statement in the loop multiplies int2 by 5. Then the test to end the loop checks to see if
int2 is greater than or equal to 2000. If not, the loop is executed again (the BLT.S
Label7 is not some kind of sandwich, but a “branch if less than” to Label7, which is
the body of the loop). If the comparison finds that int2 has exceded 2000, the
program will fall through the loop into the next statement.

Once again, just as in the if statement, the strategy is to branch if the test fails.
So the Pascal test > = (greater than or equal to) is implemented in assembly
language with a BLT (less than), the inverse. That’s because the Pascal keyword

here is until; in other words, we want to perform some operation while a condition
is not true. In the C version, the test at the bottom of the loop has the opposite sense:
we want to return to the loop while a condition ts true.
Let’s examine the second kind of looping statement.
Pascal:
while

{

int2

compare

<

2000

int2

to

2000

Label8

CMPI.W #2000,-6(A5)

169

170

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

branch out if
do int2
{

:=

greater than or =

int2

*

put multiplier

Sweden is

BGE.S

Label9

MOVEQ #5,D0

in DO

lovely this time of year

MULS

-6(A5),D0

put result back where it belongs

MOVE.W DO,-6(A5)

branch back to

BRA.S

next

}

5;

start

of

loop

statement

Label8

Label9

C:
while

/*
{

(int2

<

2000)

jump to comparison first
int2

*=

5;

/* put int2
see

BRA.S Label9

into register

the majestic

Labels MOVE.W —4(A5),D0

moose

EXT.L DO

standard C way to multiply
shifting by

2

adding makes
put

is

multiplies

yes,

by

MOVE.L

4

less

in

than

DO,D1

LSL.L #2,D0

it multiplied by 5

result back

int2

*/

}

ADD.L D1,D0

int2

MOVE.W DO,—-4(A5)

2000?

Label9

branch back to top of

CMPI.W #2000,-4(A5)
BLT.S Loop 4

loop

*/

What's different about this loop? Mainly one thing: the test to exit the loop, the
comparison of int2 to 2000, occurs before the body of the loop has been executed.

It's possible that the body of the loop will not be executed at all. If you use a repeat
statement in Pascal, or the do... while form in C, the body will be executed once

before the loop boundary test is performed. Notice that for the two kinds of loops,

the C compiler produces code that’s absolutely identical, except that the second
loop begins with a branch to the loop boundary test at the bottom.
Again, you see that the branch that’s produced by Pascal is the inverse of the

condition specified in the source. The source uses a less-than comparison to determine if the statement in the loop should be executed; the object code uses a greaterthan-or-equal-to comparison to determine if the loop should be exited.
Now let’s look at the last kind of loop, the for statement.
Pascal:
for counter
{

put

2

in

jump to
arrayl

{

put

:=

2

the

20

do

control

loop test right
[intl]

intl

in

DO

also put

in

Dl

adjust

to

loop

:=

intl

+

variable

away

MOVE.W #2,-2(A5)
BRA.S

Labelll

6;

zero-based to one-based

Labell0

MOVE.W -8(A5),D0
MOVE.W DO,D1

SUBQ.W #1,D1

}

Chapter6

do

range

turn

check on

index

into

put

intl

back

add

6

intl

put

start

to

store

at

of

array

subscript

CHK #19,D1

array offset in DO

in Dl

array

start

if

loop

less

ASL.W #1,D0
MOVE.W -—8(A5),D1
ADDQ.W #6,D1

into AO

(AO)

+

LEA -618(A5),A0

offset

in

DO

increment loop control variable
check

More about Compiled Code

ADDQ.W #1,-2(A5)

variable

Labelll

than or equal,

MOVE.W D1,0(A0,D0.W)

loop again

CMPI.W #20,-2(A5)

BLE.S Labell10

}

MOVE.W #2,-8(A5)

*/

C:
for

(counter =

/* put 2
{

2;

counter

20;

counter++)

in loop control variable

arrayl[{intl]

/* put intl

=

intl
2

-

index

into

an

put

intl

into

add

6

it

to

6;

}

Labell0 MOVE.W -2(A5),D0

it by

»

+

into DO

multiply
»«

<=

to make

it...

array

of

short

Dl

EXT.L DO
ADD.L DO,DO

MOVE.W -2(A5),D1
ADDQ.W #6,D1

put

in array

End

of

loop

(A3

already set up)

MOVE.W D1,0(A3,D0.L)

stuff:

increment loop control variable

ADDQ.W #1,-8(A5)

put

MOVEQ #20,D0

is

20

in DO

counter

yes,

<=

20?

go through

loop

CMP.W -8(A5),D0
again

BGE.S

Labell10

*/

The Pascal version starts out a little strangely. It begins by initializing the loop
variable to 2. Then it immediately jumps to the end of the loop where the test for the

loop boundary takes place. Why do this? It’s done to ensure that the initial value
specified for the loop variable isn’t greater than the boundary value. For example,
if you said for feyd : = paul to 100 do {something}, and the value of paul is 110, the loop
will not be executed at all, since the initial test of the boundary condition will fail.
It seems reasonable that jumping to the end-of-loop test right away is a good
way to make sure the loop should be run even once. So how come the C code doesn’t

do it that way? If you look at the C version, you'll see that it doesn’t do that initial
test—it assumes that the loop will be executed at least once. How does it know this?
This is an example of the C compiler being very smart. In this case, both the
initial value for the loop control variable (2) and the test value (20) are constants.

since both of these values are known at compile time, the compiler can be sure that

the loop will be executed at least once, so it spits out code that takes advantage of
this fact. If these values weren't both constants—if you had written for (counter =

171

172

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

moore; counter < = gibbons; counter + + )—the compiler has no way of knowing

what the values of moore and gibbons will be when the loop is executed, so it will
add a BRAS to the loop test, just as in our Pascal example.

More compiler stuff.

You might also be interested in looking at the code

that the compiler uses to compute the address of arrayi[int1]. The basic
technique is to put the address of the beginning of the array into an address
register and the offset into the array to the element we want ina

data register.

The offset into the array is computed by taking the array index (in our example, it’s in int1) and multiplying it by the size of an array element (in this case,

its an array of integers, which are two bytes long, so the index is multiplied by
two). The compiler can then use one of the microprocessor’s more esoteric
addressing modes, which adds the contents of an address register, the con-

tents of a data register, and an immediate value (zero in the preceding example). For the 68000 trivia fans among you, this addressing mode is called

“address register indirect with index.” Remember that, because there will be
a quiz later.

With statements
The next kind of statement we'll look at is the with statement, which is used in
Pascal as a shorthand way of referring to values in a record. There’s nothing like

with in C, so we only have a Pascal example this time. Here it is now, by golly.
with

recl

do

begin

fint

:=

{put

fint

div

prepare DO

divide DO
put
booll

6;

recl.fint

into

by

:=

fbool

:=

fint

MOVE.W DO,-576(A5)
}

OR bool2;

into

ORed value

fpoint.v

EXT.L DO

DIVS #6,D0
into

DO

OR recl.fbool with
put

MOVE.W -576(A5),D0

6

result back

{put bool2

DO

for division

MOVE.B -45(A5),D0
DO

OR.B

-574(A5),D0

in booll

MOVE.B

D0O,-46(A5)
}

one’s

MOVE .W #37,-568(A5)}

37;

{oh c’mon--this

easy!

end;

That covers most of the common statement types. Remember that this information is just a guideline to understanding compilers’ output. You'll certainly find

Chapter6

More about Compiled Code

variations on the behavior we've discussed in this chapter. But once again, you can

use the information we've discussed here as a clue to figuring out just what the
heck your compiled code means.

Linked routines
Every time you compile a program that runs on the Macintosh, you have to specify

a uses or include statement that tells which of the Macintosh libraries you’
re going

to be using; for example, MPW Pascal programmers type something like this:
uses

MemTypes,

QuickDraw,

OSIntf,

TooliIntf;

In MPW CG, you'll usually do this:
#include

<quickDraw.h>

#include <Fonts.h>
#include <Events.h>

#include <Windows .h>
#include

<Menus.h>

#include

<TextEdit.h>

#include <Dialogs.h>
#include

<Desk.h>

#include <ToolUtils.h>
#include

<Memory.h>

#include

<SegLoad.h>

#include

<Files.h>

#include <OSUtils.h>

#include <OSEvents.h>
#include

<DiskInit.h>

#include

<Packages.h>

#include

<Traps.h>

What does this do, exactly? Well, we know that it reads in the contents of each
of these files and declares them as if they were declared by our program. But what's
really happening? In particular, how does the program call procedures and functions within these libraries? What do these calls look like in object code? To be smart
debugging folks, we need to know the answer to these and other questions.
The process of figuring out how to call routines in the library files involves

cooperation between the compiler and the linker. At compile time, when the compiler encounters a call to a library routine, the compiler first checks to make sure
that the routine was in fact declared in one of the libraries; if so, it simply generates
a JSR in the object code.

173

174

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

There is a catch, though. At the time it compiles, the compiler knows some
things about the library routines: it knows their names and their parameters. It does
not, however, know where in memory the routines will reside. So how is it able to

generate a JSR if it doesn’t even know where the routine will be?
Here’s where the compiler-linker cooperation takes place. The compiler gen-

erates a dummy JSR, reserving space for a real one, and sets a flag telling the linker
that it needs help. Then, when you run the linker after compiling, you again specify
the names of the library files. One of the linker’s jobs is to attach library routines to
the code file; therefore, it knows where the library routines are located in the code

segment. The linker looks for the compiler’s dummy J5Rs to library routines and
fills them in with the proper references. Figure 6-5 symbolically illustrates this
process, from compiler to linker.
The flag that the compiler sets to tell the linker that it needs an outside routine’s

address filled in is called an external reference. It simply means that the compiler is
assuming that a procedure or function will be linked in later, and that the linker will

fill in its address at that time. If the linker can’t find an externally referenced routine
at link time, it generates an error message, which you've probably seen more than

once. If this happens, the linker gives up and refuses to generate a CODE resource.
We said that the library routines get attached to the code and become part of
the CODE resources that are created. Specifically, where do they get linked? What

CODE resource do the library routines get attached to and how are they referenced
when they’re called?

Which CODE resource they get attached to depends on the development
system you're using, but usually library routines get stuck in with CODE 1, the
main segment. On some systems, you can specify which CODE resource gets the

library routines; sometimes you only get to do this for library routines you write
yourself, not those that are provided for you, like the Macintosh interface libraries.
After you run the linker, the library routines are just like any other procedure
or function calls. If one of them is called from the same segment as the caller, the call
will appear as a PC-relative JSR; that is, it will be in the form JSR routine(PC). If the
call is in a segment different from the library routine, the call will look like any
intersegment call; that is it will jump to an address in the jump table.

If you're paying close attention, you may recall that we very briefly discussed
the jump table earlier in this chapter. We said that when the program had to call
routines in another segment it did so through a structure called the jump table,

which is at a fixed, well-known memory location. Where is the jump table, and
what do these cross-segment calls look like?
The jump table is allocated in high memory, above the stack. The official way to
find the start of the jump table is to add the value of the global variable called

CurJTOffset (stored at $934) to the contents of register A5. In practice, CurJTOffset
is always equal to $20, so the jump table begins at $20 bytes above the address that
A5 points to; in 68000-ese, this is 20(A5).

Chapter6

Figure 6-5.

More about Compiled Code

External references

Source code

Object code

Program example;

Procedure A;

*Procedure A

begin
(code)

; (code)

end;

send

Procedure B;
external;

Procedure C;

*>Procedure C

begin

A;
B;

JSR A(PC)

;call A

JSR

;reserve

0(PC)

;

{main program}

for

call

to B

find out where

it

is)

smain

A;
B;

JSR A(PC)

C;

JSR C(PC)

end.

space

(when we

send

end;

begin

(PC-relative)

JSR

0(PC)

;external

reference,

to be

;fixed by the Linker
send

After compiling
*Procedure A
> (code)
send

»Procedure C

JSR A(PC)

JSR B(PC)

;call A (PC-relative)
;f£111 in address of B

(in same segment)

-end

smain
JSR A(PC)

JSR B(PC)

;fill in the address here,

too

JSR C(PC)

-end

After linking

Since the jump table is located at an A5-relative address, references to things in
the jump table are also A5-relative expressions. So jumps to routines in other
segments look like this: JSR routine(A5). In this case, routine is the offset from A5 to
the appropriate jump table entry for that routine. There’s one jump table entry for
every routine that’s called by another segment. Later in this chapter we'll discuss jump
tables in greater detail so that you can learn everything there is to know about them.
Now we'll compare two different kinds of linked routines: standard library
routines and Macintosh ROM interface routines.

175

176

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Standard library routines
Standard library routines are functions and procedures that appear to be built into
the compiler, but are actually added in at link time. In fact, these routines are
sometimes called built-in procedures and functions. Some classic examples of stan-

dard routines include writeln, printf, open, and close.
When a program uses these or other built-in functions, the compiler creates an

external reference; that is, it puts in a dummy JSR that it expects the linker to fill in
later. The linker finds these standard functions and procedures in open of the libraries

that you link with; in MPW Pascal, this file is called PasLib; in MPW C, it’s StdCLib.
When you run the linker, it resolves references to the built-in routines by
pulling them out of the standard library and putting them into your resource file.

Usually, they’re added to the main segment, as we discussed earlier.

Forgetting to link with the standard library. If you've ever forgotten to
link a program with the standard library, you probably got an error message
telling you that some routine with a bizarre name that you never heard of
resultedin an unresolved external reference. Thisis because standard library
_

routines are pretty invisible to the average programmer. How can you tell that

some routines are library functions and not part of the compiler, unless the

documentation says so or you look at the object code? There is no way to tell.
In addition, other compiler functions may be implemented in the stan-

dard library; for example, Pascal's range checking on strings, as we saw ear-

lier,is done througha library routine called %_SRCHK. If you tried to link
that program and forgot to link with the standard library, the compiler would

report that it couldn’t find %_SRCHK, which certainly should be a finalistin
the Cryptic Error Message of the Year competition.

ROM interface routines
Every program that uses the Macintosh ROM routines must have some way of
calling those routines. Of course, the routines are always there in ROM, but the
high-level language programmer must have a method of communicating param-

eters to the ROM and actually calling the routines.
Since the ROM routines are set up to act like procedures and functions, it seems
the easiest thing to do would be to convince the compiler that the ROM routines are
simply procedures and functions in some other library that we can call. How can
we do this?
As you probably know, a call to the Macintosh ROM is made with a single 68000
instruction. Each routine in the ROM is assigned a number, called the trap word,

and that word is used as the instruction to call the routine. For example, the trap

word for CloseDialog is $A982, so an $A982 in your code is an instruction to call

Chapter6

More about Compiled Code

CloseDialog in the ROM. Note that this is not an address to JSR to—it’s the actual
machine language instruction. For more on exactly how this works, see How ROM

Calls Work in Chapter 10.
Before the trap is called, we must ensure that its parameters are set up properly.
In the case of CloseDialog, there’s one parameter to be pushed, a DialogPtr to the

dialog to be closed. So, if we were to write the assembly language necessary to make
a call to CloseDialog, we could write
MOVE.L theDialog,-(SP)

;push dialog pointer

DC.W SA982

:call CloseDialog

Can we simulate these instructions from Pascal and C? If we declared a proce-

dure that took a single parameter of type DialogPtr, that would certainly push the
parameter on the stack, but Pascal procedure and C function calls are done with
JSRs. How can we get the compiler to embed a trap word in the code instead of
doing a JSR?
Since it’s such an obvious need, it happens that there’s a method to do exactly
this in compilers available for the Macintosh. In MPW Pascal, there’s a special

directive called Inline that you can use in procedure and function declarations.
This directive tells the compiler that it shouldn't generate a JSR to call this proce-

dure or function, but instead should embed a specified byte or bytes directly in the
code. In MPW C, you can accomplish the same thing by defining the function to be

equal to the trap word. We’ll see an example of this shortly. In addition, MPW C
(and most other C compilers for the Macintosh) define a function class called
pascal. If you declare a function as pascal, it will follow Pascal’s conventions,
including passing parameters from left to right and removing its own parameters
from the stack, so that it can match up with what the ROM routines are expecting.
The format of an Inline directive is this:
Procedure XXXXX

(paraml:

type;

{more paramsl});

Inline

S$YYYY;

When the compiler encounters a call to this procedure, it will push the param-

eters on the stack. Then, instead of a JSR to somewhere to call the procedure, the
compiler will simply place the word specified by $YYYY directly in the code. This
means that Macintosh ROM calls that take their parameters from the stack, which
includes virtually all of the User Interface Toolbox, can be called in this way.
To continue with our example, we could specify a procedure to call CloseDialog like this:
Procedure CloseDialog

(theDialog:

DialogPtr);

Inline

$A982;

In C, the function looks like this:
pascal void CloseDialog(DialogPtr theDialog)

=

0xA982;

177

178

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

What will happen if we call this routine? First, the parameter we pass will be

pushed on the stack; then there should be a $A982 embedded in the code, which
will cause a call to CloseDialog in the ROM. Perfect! So perfect, in fact, that this is
exactly the way it’s done.

Since most programmers want to have access to the Macintosh ROM routines,

most development systems come with predefined libraries for the ROM calls. For
example, MPW Pascal comes witha set of libraries that defines all the User Interface Toolbox calls, and MPWC hasa large set of header files for the various parts of
the Toolbox. If you look at these files, you'll see that after the constants, types, and
defines, they’re mostly a long list of procedures and functions with trap numbers.
There’s nothing magical about these declarations. If you want, you can even
define your own routines. The syntax allows for any number of words after the

Inline or function name; so if you have a handy, very short assembly language
routine that you'll be using, you can avoid having to specify it in a separate file that
will have to be linked in. Just declare the routine and specify the object code as

shown.
This takes care of ROM calls that take their parameters on the stack, which

include most of the Toolbox routines. But what about the Operating System routines, most of which take their parameters in registers, not on the stack? How can
a Pascal or C communication to these routines be set up?

Let's take a look at this problem with a sample register-based ROM call. For our
example, we'll choose the function GetTrapAddress. This Operating System function is used to find out the address of a Macintosh trap; given a trap word, it returns
the address of that trap.
To call GetTrapAddress, you specify the desired trap word in register DO. After

calling, the address of that trap will be returned in register AO. We can use the Inline
directive to produce the trap word to call GetTrapAddress, but how can we get
Pascal or C to put the parameter into register DO instead of on the stack? And once
the function returns, how can we obtain the result that’s in AQ?
Most Pascals, including MPW Pascal, always push their procedure and func-

tion parameters on the stack. There’s absolutely no way to declare a function that
puts parameters into registers instead of on the stack. So one way to call register-

based routines would be to first declare a Pascal procedure to push the parameters
on the stack, like this:
Function GetTrapAddress

(trapNum:

Integer)

:

Longint;

Then we need a way in the procedure itself to take the trapNum parameter off

the stack and put it in register DO (where the ROM expects it), make the ROM call,
then move the result from register AO (where the ROM puts it) onto the stack for
Pascal. To understand the problem better, let’s look at the object code that the
compiler will generate for a call to this function.

Chapter6

CLR.L

-(A7)

MOVE.W trapNum,-(A7)

JSR

GetTrapAddress

;make

space

;push

trapNum

;jump

to

a

;resolve

for

function

More about Compiled Code

result

parameter

routine

stack

vs.

which

will

registers

Here we see that the compiler will first reserve 4 bytes of stack space for the

function result, since it’s a longint, then will push the one parameter, and then will
JSR somewhere to a routine called GetTrapAddress.
Wherever this GetTrapAddress routine is, it must remove the trapNum parameter from the stack and putitin DO, call the ROM, and then move the function result
from AO onto the stack. Let’s write an assembly language routine to do just that.
GetTrapAddress
MOVE.L

(A7)+,Al

;save

return

MOVE.W

(A7)+,D0

;put

trapNum

DC.W S$A146

;this

MOVE.L

j;put

JMP

A0O,(A7)

(Al)

calls
call

;return

to

address

in

DO

to

for

caller

call

GetTrapAddress

result

onto

stack

caller

This routine takes care of putting the parameter and the function result in the
right places. When this routine gets control, it has been called by the Pascal calling

sequence for GetTrapAddress, and the stack looks like Figure 6-6. To get to the
parameter, we must start by popping the return address; we stash it in Al so that we

can use it later. Next we move trapNum off the stack and into DO, which is where

Offset

Part of stack

from SP
Space for
function result

trapNum

Return address

Figure 6-6.

Stack after calling GetTrapAddress from Pascal

I79

180

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

the ROM call to GetTrapAddress will expect to find it.

Next is the word that actually

calls GetTrapAddress, $A146.

After we call the ROM, the function result is in AO. We move it onto the stack to
the space reserved by Pascal for the function result with a MOVE.L instruction.
Finally, we can return to the caller by jumping through the return address saved in Al.
A routine like this, which mediates between a stack-based compiler and a
register-based ROM call, is known as a glue routine, or simply glue. The glue

routines allow us to solve this sticky problem.

Although C uses the register storage class to keep variables in registers, most C
compilers have no way of saying that specific function parameters should be in
registers. In these systems, C uses the same glue technique that Pascal uses for
register-based routines.
Recent versions of MPW C

(starting with version 3.2, released in 1990) have

new syntax that allows programmers to specify registers for parameters and function returns when declaring functions. Apple now uses this syntax heavily to

eliminate the need for glue routines. The syntax looks like this:
#pragma parameter AO GetTrapAddress
pascal
=

long GetTrapAddress

(short

(_ D0)

trapNum)

0xA146;

The #pragma indicates that this is a compiler directive. The rest of the line tells
the compiler that the parameter will be passed in register DO, and the result should
come back in AO. Note the two lovely underscores that precede the register names.
_

Like standard library routines, glue routines get linked into different segments

depending on your development system. Usually, they’re glued onto the main
segment. Of course, you don’t have to write glue routines for the ROM yourself.
They usually come with the development system.

The jump table
We've mentioned the jump table a couple of times. Now it’s time to reveal all its
secrets.

Just to recap for those of you who came in late, the jump table exists so that
routines in one segment can call routines in another segment. When routines are in

the same segment, the call is done with a PC-relative JSR instruction, since the
difference between the current location (the PC) and the routine to be called is

always the same. Whena routine in one segment calls another segment, however,
it can’t be sure of the offset between the routines.
To solve this little problem, the system creates a jump table, which is a table of
entry points. There’s one entry in the jump table for each routine that’s referenced

by a routine in another segment. Figure 6-7 illustrates the use of the two different
methods for same-segment and cross-segment calls.

Chapter 6

More about Compiled Code

Heap

CODE 6
Procedure A

Procedure B
CODE 6

Procedure A

Procedure A calls B: JSR n(PC)
Heap

Heap

CODE 9

Procedure Y | |
CODE 12
Procedure X

Jump table
|=
Entry: address of N

Entry: address of Q

CODE 9
Procedure Y

|

Entry: address of Y

CODE 12
Entry: address of Z

Procedure X

Procedure X calls Y: JSR n(A5)
(when CODE segments move, jump table is updated)
Figure 6-7.

Calling procedures and functions

The jump table always begins at $20 bytes above A5. Cross-segment calls look
like this in your program: JSR routine(A5), where routine is the offset from the
beginning of the jump table to the desired entry, plus $20.

Honesty department.

Actually, this offset is kept in a global variable called

CurJTOffset. This value is $20 and will likely stay that way forever,but just to
be sure, you should dynamically check it if you ever need it.

181

182

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

The jump table is created by the linker. As the linker puts the pieces of the
program together, it notes each routine that’s referenced outside its own segment
and starts building the jump table. When it has linked the entire program, it sorts
the jump table entries by segment number. The linker spits out the jump table as
part of CODE resource 0.
There’s another interesting problem that crops up when you're calling rou-

tines ina

different segment. It’s possible that the segment you're calling won't be in

memory at the time you make the call, so the system had better make sure that the
segment is brought in before diving into it. We'll talk about how this happens.

Format of jump table entries
What is the format of a jump table? Would Ibe able to recognize one if I bumped
into it on the street? Each entry in a jump table is 8 bytes long. There are two forms

of jump table entries: loaded and unloaded. A loaded segment is currently in
memory and is locked. An unloaded segment is purgeable, is unlocked, and may be

in memory. We'll discuss shortly how segments get loaded and unloaded.
Whena program starts up, all segments are unloaded. Figure 6-8 shows the

format of an unloaded jump table entry. The first two bytes give the location of the
routine, expressed as an offset from the beginning of the segment. The next six bytes
are actual executable code; this is the code that the cross-segment calls jump into.

What does this code do? It simply pushes the segment number of this routine’s
segment onto the stack and then calls the Operating System routine LoadSeg.

LoadSeg reads in the specified code segment and locks it. It then proceeds to
change the jump table entry to the loaded entry format.
Loading the segment, of course, loads all the routines in the segment. Since
there’s a jump table entry for each routine in a segment that’s referenced externally, it’s possible that there’s more than one entry for a given segment. So LoadSeg
goes through the jump table and courteously changes all the unloaded entries for
the segment it just loaded into loaded entries. Figure 6-9 illustrates this process.

Procedure calls (JSRs) come here

|
Offset from start
of segment to
procedure

Figure 6-8.

MOVE.W SegNum, -(SP);

Unloaded jump table entry

LoadSeg

Chapter6

More about Compiled Code

Part of jump table

Segment 17, procedure M

Segment 17, function R

Segment 18, procedure D
A call to any of
these will load
the segment and
put these four
entries in the
loaded form

Segment 18, procedure F

Segment 18, function K

Segment 18, procedure S

Segment 19, function E

Segment 19, procedure H

Segment 19, function T

Figure 6-9.

LoadSeg fixes jump table entries

Finally, when LoadSeg has finished changing all the jump table entries for this
segment, it jumps to the called routine, using the offset that it got from the first
word of the unloaded jump table entry.

183

184

PART TWO

&

DEBUGGING

MacCharlie onthe MTA.

Suppose you're tracing through your application

and you trace a call to another, unloaded segment. As you trace into the jump
table, eventually the next instruction will be a LoadSeg call. Usually, when

you're debugging and you reacha trap call, you don’t want to trace the trap
into the ROM—you just want to get past it. So most debuggers have com-

mands that return control after executing the trap; in MacsBug, for example,
this command is T(trace).

LoadSeg presents a unique problem, though: it never “returns.” Instead
of finishing its job by returning to the code that called it, it ends by jumping

into the newly loaded segment. This means that you can’t use

acommand like

MacsBug’s trace command to trace around a LoadSeg. If you try to, the

debugger will execute the LoadSeg and will wait forever for it to return,
slipping it sandwiches every now and then.
Luckily, there’s a neat trick employed in LoadSeg that allows you to solve
this problem. There’s a global location called LoadTrap (a byte at $12D) that is
a flag to LoadSeg. It works like this: when LoadSeg is just about finished and
is about to jump to the routine it just loaded, it first checks to see if LoadTrap
is nonzero. If itis nonzero, instead of jumping into the newly loaded routine,

it breaks into the debugger. This is great! It means that you can trace merrily
along and, when you come to a LoadSeg call, use the debugger to set location
$12D to something other than zero. Then, just exit the debugger (G from
MacsBug). Ina

flash, you'll
be back in the debugger, and the program counter

will be at the last instruction in LoadSeg. You can then continue to trace right
into the newly called routine.

Now let's look at the format of a loaded jump table entry and compare it to what
we've already learned. Figure 6-10 shows your average loaded jump table entry. The

Procedure calls (JSRs) come here

Segment number

Figure 6-10.

Loaded jump table entry

(Address of procedure)

Chapter6

More about Compiled Code

last six bytes of the entry are still executable code, just as before. This time, instead of

calling LoadSeg, the code simply does a JMP (jump) to the start of the routine.

When LoadSeg changed the jump table entries from unloaded style to loaded
style, it replaced the LoadSeg instruction in the last six bytes with a direct, absolute
address jump to the routine. An absolute jump works, because once the segment is
loaded, it’s locked. LoadSeg computes this address dynamically at the time it mod-

ifies the jump table entry by getting the newly loaded segment’s handle, dereferencing it, and adding the offset to the desired routine, which it gets from the other
2 bytes in the jump table entry. Figure 6-11 shows how this process works.

Note that when the jump table entry is in the loaded state the first two bytes are
used to keep the segment number. This is done so that later, when the segment is

unloaded, the entry can be restored to its unloaded state (MOVE.W segnum,—
(A7); LoadSeg).
Asegment gets unloaded when the application calls UnloadSeg. When you call

UnloadSeg, the process of loading the segment is reversed. First, UnloadSeg
unlocks the segment. Then it looks through the jump table for all entries for routines in this segment and changes each one to the unloaded state. It does not
change the purgeable status of the segment; since most segments are normally
marked purgeable when they’re created by the development system, unloaded
segments may be purged.

Offset

MOVE.W SegNum, -(SP)

Unloaded jump table entry when LoadSeg is called

e LoadSeg gets the segment number off the stack and calls GetResource on it,
e calls MoveHHi to move the segment up in memory,
e HLocks the segment,
e dereferences it,
e adds the offset,

e stores a JMP to that address in the jump table entry's last six bytes,
e stores the segment number in the jump table entry's first two bytes,
e repeats the last three steps for each of this segment's entries,

e then jumps to byte 3 in the jump table entry

Segment
number

JMP to procedure address

Byte 3

Figure 6-11.

LoadSeg

185

186

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

The unloaded jump table entry keeps the offset to the routine it represents in
the first two bytes of the entry. It stashes this information so that it can be used
when LoadSeg is called on the segment.

Also, note that no matter which of the two states a jump table entry is in the
application’s call looks the same: it’s a JSR routine(A5), and the address that’s

jumped to is the third byte of a jump table entry. If the entry is unloaded, this will
cause LoadSeg to be called; if the entry is already loaded, this will simply be a JMP
to the desired routine.

LoadSeg calls GetResource.

In the incestuous tradition of the ROM, Load-

Seg calls GetResource to load in the desired CODE resource. You probably
know that GetResource is smart: it first looks to see if the resource is already
in memory. If so, it simply returns a handle to it. If not, it loads it from disk and

then returns the handle. That means that LoadSeg is a pretty inexpensive call,
as is UnloadSeg. In fact, it’s not a bad idea to use UnloadSeg to unload all your
segments every time through the main event loop. That way they can be

purged in case memory is needed. They’re also unlocked, so they can be relocated if necessary. If their memory space isn’t required, they won’t be purged,

and the next call to one of them won't have to hit the disk to reload it.

Miscellaneous things in your object code
A double-clickable application is ready to run on the Macintosh. There’s no code

needed to do any global setup when the application starts. By the time it executes
its first instruction, space for global variables has already been allocated on the

stack, so the application doesn’t have to set up any registers or memory locations to
make the Toolbox or Operating System happy. It can just begin with its own code.
As you look through your application’s object code, you'll find some things

that look completely out of place and off the wall. This is often behind the scenes”
code that the compiler generates to set things up for the application. Usually, this

code is there to support the compiler’s built-in procedures and functions, called the
run-time environment. Try this experiment with your favorite development sys-

tem: write an empty program, one with just the minimum syntax needed to make
the compiler happy, then compile it and look at the object code. You'll probably be
very surprised to find a whole bunch of unidentifiable code. Don’t worry about

this—it’s just the stuff that’s added by the standard library, and it’s normal, if
unexpected.
Another unexpected thing that you'll see in your object code is register optimiza-

tion. This is where the compiler takes a commonly used variable, such as a loop control

variable, and places it in a register for the duration of the loop. This is done because
operations like addition and subtraction are faster if they’re done on registers.

Chapter6

More about Compiled Code

The MPW Pascal compiler ensures that registers D3 through D7 and A2

through A4 are not changed by Pascal routines, while MPWC preserves all those
registers, plus register D2. Other compilers have similar register-saving conventions. This doesn’t mean that the routine can’t use these registers—it simply means

that the compiler will automatically save them on the stack at the beginning of the
procedure and restore them at the end if it uses any of them. The other registers are

called scratch registers, and they're typically used and reused very often.
So, if you have a routine that includes a for loop, the compiler may put the loop

control variable into a register, probably D7. If it optimizes more than one variable,
it can also use D3 through D6 and A2 through A4; the MPW C compiler will also use
D2, as we said.
You call tell which registers the compiler has used for optimizations in a routine if you look at the first instruction after the LINK. If there are any register

optimizations, there will be an instruction of the form MOVEM.L D3-D7/A2-A4,—
(A7), where the registers listed will correspond to the registers actually used by the
routine. For example, if the routine contains three for statements that are optimized
into registers, you'll probably see

a MOVEM.L D5-D7,—(A7) instruction at the

beginning of the routine, which saves these three registers on the stack. Then, near
the end of the routine, there will be a corresponding MOVEM. L (A7) +, D5-D7,
which will put things back the way they were.

Summary
Remember that the descriptions of algorithms and techniques we've discussed in
this chapter are based on the behavior of MPW Pascal and C in 1992; your actual

compiler may vary. Apple and other language makers are always making things
better, so don’t believe what we say here if your object code seems to be different.
Use the information that you've learned here to navigate through your compiler’s
object code. By stepping through unfamiliar code with your source listing as a
guide, you should be able to figure out what the compiler’s doing. Then you'll
really know what's going on!

187

188

vy,

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

_ Things to remember —

© Procedure and function calls translate into JSR instructions.
e Routines in the same segment are called with PC-relative JSR instructions,
like this: JSR xx(PC).

e Routinesin other segments are called with
jjumps into thejump table, which
look like this: JSR xx(A5).

¢ Conditional statements are implemented with CMP instructions followed

by Bcc (branch conditionally) instructions. The branch testis the opposite of
the condition specifiedin the source.
|

e Tests to end repetitive statements are also done with CMP instructions
followed by conditional branches.

e Linked routines are compiled separately and then added to the object file
by the linker.
-@ ROM interface routines can be very simple, especially for Toolbox calls, or
~ they may have to move things between registers and the stack for OS calls.

« Thejump table:contains one entry for every routine that’s called from
outside its own segment. It can be in one of two forms, depending on
whether its segment is loaded or not.

e Some weird things can show up in your object code. Don’t worry, they
usually come in peace.

C

H

A

P

T

E

R

7

Real Live Debugging
In this chapter, we’re going to take everything we've learned and use it in some

actual debugging situations. We’ll take an example program with some bugs and
proceed to run it, observe problems, and then use a debugger and our knowledge
to find and eliminate the bugs.

What we'll do
The program that we'll use is an expanded version of the tiny Pascal program

sample that appears in the Road Map chapter of Inside Macintosh. This program, as
modified, allows the user to open any number of nonresizable, nonscrollable (we're

talking no frills here) windows and type text into them. The program supports
standard text editing in the windows, and it also supports desk accessories, with
cut and paste between all windows. Listing 7-1 is the source code for the sample
program.

The debugger we'll be using is MacsBug version 6.2.2. All the debugger dis-

plays that you see in this chapter were produced with MacsBug’s LOG command.
For this chapter, we'll assume the role of the programmer who is testing the
program, since it’s much less embarrassing to catch our own mistakes than to have
someone else do it for us. We'll run the program and try its features, waiting for
something bad to happen. When it does, we'll decide on a course of action and
eventually fix the problem.

Since this is the first time the program has ever been run, we should approach
this assuming that the program will fail. This means that we should enable trap

189

190

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

recording, the debugger feature that records traps as they're executed. If we enter the
ATR command in MacsBug, we'll always know the most recently executed trap calls.
Also, since the ROM calls ROM traps a lot, and we're usually just interested in
tracking the traps our program calls, we need to tell MacsBug to record only traps
that our application executes. We can do this by appending an A to our command,
making it ATRA. This will ensure that traps are recorded only from code executed
in the application heap zone, which should include all of the application's code.

—

r

Listing

7-1.

program Showoff;

{

listing

7-1l.p

}

uses

MemTypes,

QuickDraw,

OSIntf,

Toolintf,

PackIntf,

Traps;

const

appleID =

128;

fileID

=

129;

editID

=

130;

appleM =

1;

fileM

=

2;

editM

=

3;

{resource IDs/menu

{index for each menu

IDs

for Apple,

in myMenus

=

3;

{total

aboutItem =

1;

{item in Apple menu}

{Items

menuCount

undoItem

=

1;

cutitem

=

3;

copyItem

=

4;

pasteItem

=

5;

clearitem =

6;

newiltem =

quitiItem =
wName =

{items

1;

closeItem =

(array of menu handles)
}

number of menus}

in Edit menu}

in File menu}

3;

5;

‘Window

windDX = 25;

‘;

{prefix

for

window

names}

{distance to move for new windows}

WindDY = 25;
leftEdge
topEdge

=
=

10;
42;

rightEdge

= 210;

botEdge

175;

=

File and Edit menus}

{initial

dimensions

of window}

Chapter7

Real Live Debugging

Listing

7-1.

191

continued

var

myMenus:

array

dragRect:
txRect:

textH:

OF

MenuHandle;

{handles

{rectangle

TEHandle;

for text

in

boolean;

{true

if

user

doneFlag:

boolean;

{true

if

user has

is

chosen Quit

EventRecord;

{information

wRecord:

WindowRecord;

{information about the

myWindow:

WindowPtr;

{pointer to wRecord}

myWinPeek

:

{another pointer to wRecord}

nextWNum:

WindowPeek;

menusOK:

Str255;

Item}

an event}

application window}

for next window to

{title of

next window to be opened}

of

next window

(for

be

pressed}

{portRect
{number

opened}

title)}

{pointer to preserve GrafPort}

GrafPtr;

{for disabling menu items}

boolean;

Longint;

scrCopyErr:

set

about

{window in which mouse button was

Longint;

scrapErr:

procedure

WindowPtr;

Rect;

savedPort:

dragging window}

Shift-clicking}

myEvent:

nextWTitle:

for

application window}

{typed character}

extended:

nextWRect:

the menus}

{handle to Textedit record}

char;

whichWindow:

to

{rectangle used to mark boundaries

Rect;

theChar:

{

[1..menuCount]

Rect;

Integer;

SetUpMenus;

up menus

and menu

bar

}

var

i:

Integer;

begin
myMenus[appleM]

:= GetMenu(appleID);

{read Apple menu}

AddResMenu(myMenus[appleM],
’DRVR’ );

{add desk accessory

myMenus[fileM]

:= GetMenu(fileID);

{read File menu

}

myMenus[editM]

:= GetMenu(editID);

{read Edit menu

}

for

i:=1

to menuCount do

InsertMenu(myMenus[ij},0);

{install menus
{and draw menu bar}

DrawMenuBar;
end;

names}

in menu bar

}

{SetUpMenus}

procedure OpenWindow;
{

Open

a new window

}

begin
NumToString

nextWTitle
myWindow

:= NewWindow

Pointer

SetPort

txRect

(-1),

True,

nextWTitle);

(wName,

{prepare number

nextWTitle);

(Nil,

nextWRect,

0);

{open the window}

(myWindow);

for

title}

{add to prefix}

nextWTitle,

True,

{make it the current port}

noGrowDocProc,

:= thePort”.portRect;{prepare TERecord for new window}

InsetRect
textH

(nextWNum,

:= concat

:=

myWinPeek

(txRect,
TENew

4,

0);

(txRect,

:= WindowPeek

txRect);

(myWindow)
;

192

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

—~

Listing 7-1.

myWinPeek*.refcon
OffsetRect

:= Longint

(nextWRect,

(textH);

continued

{keep TEHandle in refcon!}

windDX,

windDY);{move window down and right}
if nextWRect.right > dragRect.right
{move back if it’s too far over}
then OffsetRect (nextWRect, -nextWRect.left + leftEdge, 0);

if

nextWRect.bottom >

then OffsetRect
nextWNum

menusOK

:=

:=

nextWNum +

1;

0,

{bump

-nextWRect.top + topEdge);
number

for

next window}

false;

EnableItem
end;

dragRect.bottom

(nextWRect,

(myMenus

[editM],0);

{in

case this

is

the only window}

{OpenWindow}

procedure KillWindow

{Close

a window and

(theWindow:

WindowPtr);

throw everything away}

begin

TEDispose

(TEHandle

if

:=

(theWindow)*.refcon)
);

{throw away TERecord}

DisposeWindow
textH

(WindowPeek

(theWindow);

{throw away WindowRecord}

NIL;

{for

TEIdle

in

main

event

FrontWindow = NIL

{if no more windows,
(myMenus[fileM], closeItem);

then DisableItem

if WindowPeek

(FrontWindow)”*.windowKind < 0
{if a desk acc is

then EnableItem

(myMenus[editM],

else DisableItem
end;

loop}

disable Close}

coming up,

enable undo}

undoItem)

(myMenus[editM],

undoItem);

{KillWindow}

function MyFilter
var

itemHit:

(theDialog:
Integer):

DialogPtr;

var theEvent:

EventRecord;

Boolean;

var

theType:

Integer;

theItem:

Handle;

theBox:

Rect;

finalTicks:

Longint;

begin

if

(BitAnd(theEvent.message,charCodeMask)
or

=

(BitAnd(theEvent.message,charCodeMask)

then

13)
=

{carriage return}

3)

{enter}

begin
GetDItem

(theDialog,

HiliteControl
Delay

(8,

MyFilter
end

theType,

:=
:=

(ControlHandle

1;
True;

{if

BitAnd...then begin}
else MyFilter := False;
end;

theItem,

theBox) ;

(theItem),

1);

(theItem),

0);e

finalTicks);

HiliteControl
itemHit

1,

(ControlHandle

{function MyFilter}

Chapter7

193

Real Live Debugging

_,

Listing 7-1.

continued

procedure DoAboutBox;
var

itemHit:

Integer;

begin
myWindow

:= GetNewDialog

(1000,

@MyFilter, pointer

(-1));

repeat

ModalDialog
until

DisposDialog
end;

(Nil,

itemHit

=

itemHit)

1;

(myWindow)
;

{procedure DoAboutBox}

procedure DoCommand

(mResult: LONGINT);
{Execute Item specified by mResult, the

result of MenuSelect}

var

theItem:

Integer;

{menu

item number

theMenu:

Integer;

{menu

number

{desk

accessory

name:

Str255;

temp:

Integer;

from mResult

from mResult

low-order word}

high-order word}

name}

begin
theItem

:= LoWord(mResult);

{call

theMenu

:=

{

HiWord(mResult);

case theMenu

of

menu

{case

Toolbox Utility routines to set}
item number and menu number}
on menu

ID}

appleID:

if

theItem = aboutItem
then

DoAboutBox

else
begin
GetItem(myMenus[appleM],theItem,
name) ;

{GetPort

(savedPort)
;}

scrapErr

:=

scrCopyErr

temp

:=

ZeroScrap;
:=

TEToScrap;

OpenDeskAcc(name)
;

EnableItem

(myMenus

[editM],0);

{SetPort
if

(savedPort)
;}
FrontWindow <> NIL

then

begin
EnableItem

(myMenus

[fileM],

EnableItem

(myMenus

[editM],

end;
menusOK

end;

{if

{if
:=

FrontWindow then begin}

false;

theItem...else

fileID:
case theItem of

closeItem);
undolItem)
;

begin}

194

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Listing 7-1.

continued

newItem:

OpenWindow;
closeItem:

if WindowPeek (FrontWindow)”*.windowKind < 0
then CloseDeskAcc (windowPeek (FrontWindow)”~.windowKind)
{if desk acc window, close it}

else

begin

DisposeWindow (FrontWindow);

{if it’s mine,

blow it away}

KillWindow (FrontWindow)
;
end; {if WindowPeek...else begin}

quitItem:

doneFlag
end;

{case

:= TRUE;

{quit}

theItem}

editID:
begin

if not

SystemEdit(theItem-1)

then

case theItem of

{case on menu item number}

cutItem:

TECut(textH);

{call TextEdit to handle Item}

copyitem:
TECopy (textH) ;
pasteItem:

TEPaste(textH);

clearItem:
TEDelete(textH);
end;
end;
end;

{case

theItem}

{editID begin}
{case

theMenu}

HiliteMenu(0);
end;

{DoCommand}

procedure FixCursor;
var

mouseLoc:

point;

begin
GetMouse

(mouseLoc);

if PtInRect (mouseLoc, thePort”.portRect )
then SetCursor (GetCursor (iBeamCursor)”*)
else

end;

SetCursor

(arrow);

{procedure FixCursor}

Chapter7

Listing 7-1.

begin

{main program}

InitGraf(@thePort);
InitFonts;
FlushEvents(everyEvent,0);

InitWindows;

InitMenus;
TEInit;

InitDialogs(NIL);
InitCursor;
SetUpMenus;

with

screenBits.bounds

do

SetRect (dragRect,4,24,right-4,bottom-4)
;
doneFlag
menusOK

:=

nextWNum
SetRect

:=

:=

false;

false;

1;

{initialize window number}

(nextWRect, leftEdge,topEdge,rightEdge,botEdge)
;

{initialize window rectangle}
OpenWindow;
{

Main event

{start with one open window}
loop

}

repeat

SystemTask;

if

FrontWindow <>

NIL

then

if WindowPeek (FrontWindow)”.windowKind >= 0
then FixCursor;

if

not menusOK and

(FrontWindow = NIL)

then

begin
DisableItem

(myMenus

[fileM],

closeItem);

DisableItem

(myMenus

[editM],

0);

menusOK

end;

:=

true;

{if FrontWindow...then begin}

TEIdle(textH);

if

GetNextEvent (everyEvent,myEvent )
then
case

myEvent.what

of

mouseDown:

case FindWindow(myEvent.where,whichWindow)

195

Real Live Debugging

of

inSysWindow:

SystemClick(myEvent,whichWindow)
;
inMenuBar:
DoCommand (MenuSelect (myEvent.where) );
inDrag:

DragWindow(whichWindow,myEvent.where,dragRect);

continued

196

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Listing 7-1. continued :
inContent:

begin

if whichWindow <> FrontWindow
then SelectWindow(whichWindow)
else

begin

;
GlobalToLocal(myEvent.where)

extended := BitAnd(myEvent.modifiers,shiftKey)

<> 0;

;
TEClick(myEvent.where,extended,textH)
end;
end;

{else}

{inContent}

inGoAway:

if TrackGoAway (whichWindow, myEvent.where)
;
then KillWindow (whichWindow)
end;

{case FindWindow}

keyDown,

autoKey:

begin

theChar := CHR(BitAnd(myEvent.message,charCodeMask)
);
if BitAnd(myEvent.modifiers,cmdKey) <> 0
)
then DoCommand(MenuKey(theChar)
else TEKey(theChar,textH);

end;

{keyDown,

autoKey begin}

activateEvt:
begin

if BitAnd(myEvent.modifiers,activeFlag) <> 0
then
{application window is becoming active}
begin
SetPort

(GrafPtr

(myEvent.message)
);

textH := TEHandle (WindowPeek (myEvent.message)”~.refcon);
EnableItem

(myMenus[fileM],closeItem);
DisableItem(myMenus [editM],undoItem) ;

if WindowPeek (FrontWindow)*.nextWindow’.windowKind < 0
then

scrCopyErr

:= TEFromScrap;

end {if BitAnd...then begin}
else
{application window is becoming inactive}
begin

TEDeactivate (TEHandle (WindowPeek(myEvent.message)”.refcon) );
if WindowPeek (FrontWindow)*.windowKind < 0
then

begin

EnableItem
scrapErr

:=

scrCopyErr

(myMenus[editM],

undoItem);

ZeroScrap;

:= TEToScrap;

end {if WindowPeek...then begin}
else DisableItem (myMenus[editM], undolItem);
end;
{else begin}
end;

f{activateEvt begin}

updateEvt:

begin
BeginUpdate(WindowPtr(myEvent.message)
);

EraseRect (WindowPtr(myEvent.message)”.portRect);

Chapter7

Listing 7-1.

TEUpdate (WindowPtr(myEvent.message)”.portRect,
TEHand1le(WindowPeek (myEvent .message)”.refcon) );

);
EndUpdate (WindowPtr(myEvent.message)
end; {updateEvt begin}
end;

{case myEvent.what}

until doneFlag;
end.

Listing 7-1.r.

/* listing 7-1l.r */
#include

Types.r

resource

‘'MENU’

(128)

{

128,
textMenuProc,

Ox7FFFFFFD,

enabled,

apple,
{

About Showoff..., noIcon, noKey, noMark, plain,
-, nolIcon, noKey, noMark, plain

'MENU’

resource

(129)

{

129,
textMenuProc,

Ox7FFFFFF7,

enabled,
File,

{

New, noIcon, N, noMark, plain,
Open, noIcon, O, noMark, plain,
Close, noIcon, W, noMark, plain,
-, noIcon, noKey, noMark, plain,
Quit, noIcon, Q, noMark, plain

3
‘MENU’

resource

(130)

{

130,

textMenuProc,

Ox7FFFFFFC,

enabled,

Edit,

{

Undo, noIcon, Z, noMark, plain,
-, noIcon, nokKey, noMark, plain,
Cut, noIcon, X, noMark, plain,

197

Real Live Debugging

continued

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

~\

Listing 7-l.r. continued

Copy, noIcon, C, noMark, plain,
Paste, noIcon, V, noMark, plain,
Clear, noIcon, noKey, noMark, plain

};

}

resource

{

‘'DITL’

(1000,

About box)

/* array DITLarray:
/*

[1]

{61,

{

2 elements */

*/

191,

Button

81,

251},

{

enabled,
OK

}y

/*

[2]

{8,

*/

24,

56,

272},

StaticText {

disabled,

Example program\nby Scott Knaster
\nversion 3.0
12/12/91

};

}

}

resource
{62,

‘DLOG’
100,

(1000,

148,

About

box)

{f{

412},

dBoxProc,

visible,
goAway,

0x0,
1000,

New Dialog

ae

S

Running the program
Let’s crank ’er up! Just for the record, we’re running this program on a good old
Macintosh IIx computer under System 7.0 with 5 megabytes of RAM. We double-

click the program, and it begins by displaying a single window entitled “Window
1.” Right off the bat, there’s something wrong: there should be a blinking insertion

point in the window, but there’s not. So we begin keeping a list of observed

problems by noting this as problem number one.
At this point, we, the programmer-debugger, can either work on finding out

what's causing the no-insertion-point problem, or we can continue running the
program normally and see if we can discover any other bugs. Since one bug can

often cause a number of different problems to appear as symptoms, it’s usually a

good idea to do some detective work on a bug as soon as you see it. However, this
time we'll continue running the program normally to see what other problems we

Chapter7

Real Live Debugging

observe, for two reasons: (1) this is the first time we’ve run the program, so we'd like
to see whether it works at all, and (2) since this problem is evident just by starting
the program, it’s apparently very easy to duplicate, so we can check it out whenever we want.

The first feature of the program we'll try out is the ability to type text into a
window. When we type, the text does appear in the window, although there’s still
no insertion point visible. Also, we can select text, and cut, copy, and paste seem

to work correctly, both from the Edit menu and with keyboard command key
combinations.
After selecting text, we find another funny problem. When we make a selection
in the text and then make a different selection, the first selection stays highlighted,
as you see in Figure 7-1. This problem may be related to the no-insertion-point
problem. This becomes problem number two on our list.
The next thing we'll try is dragging the window around the screen. This seems
to work fine. If we drag the window so that part of the text is off the screen and then
drag it back onto the screen, the text is redrawn properly. At least something is

working right!
Now we'll try opening additional windows with the File menu’s New command. If we choose the New item, another window appears on the screen, just
below and to the right of the first window’s original location; the new window’s

@

File

Em

Edit
Window 1

The MC68020 is tie fijrst full
32-bit implementation of Li
M68000 family of

microp§jocssorsfjrpim

:

Motorolja. Using aclinowledged |

| advanced technology, the

—

‘

MC68020 is implemented with |

| 32-bit regifters and data

Figure 7-1.

Screen display showing multiple selection bug

199

200

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

title is “Window 2”; the new window is highlighted as the front window, and the
first window is unhighlighted. All this is just as we’d wanted it, so things seem to be
goinga little better. Still no insertion point in the new window, though. Also, when
we highlight another window, the text in the first window is staying highlighted,
even though it shouldn’t be. This is number three on our problem list.

Once again, even though there’s no insertion point in the new window, typed
text still appears properly, and the text can be edited by selecting it and using the
editing commands. We can drag the second window around, too, and we can even

copy and paste between the two windows (we’re on a winning streak here).
We shouldn't get too cocky, though, because there are some more problems.
When we drag Window1 so that it covers part of Window 2, then uncover Window

2, Window 1 goes blank! The same thing happens if we cover Window 1 with
Window 2 and then drag away Window 2: as soon as the partially hidden window

is exposed, the frontmost window’s contents go blank. This is problem four on our list.

We also have to observe the behavior of the Undo and Close menu items. Since
we re not running MultiFinder here, we want Undo to be enabled if and only if the
frontmost window is a desk accessory, and we want Close to be enabled if there are
any windows open, desk accessories included. If we open several windows, including some desk accessories then click on various windows, we see that Undo seems

to know what to do, being active for desk accessories and inactive for application
windows. Also, the application doesn’t seem to mind if we open several more
windows, except for the problems we've already seen.

Next we try closing a window by typing command-W ...

and it’s crash time.

There’s been a system error, and the debugger takes over with this message:
Bus

Error

while

at

reading

00048678

long word

from 50FF8053

in

Supervisor

data

space

This greeting from the debugger tells us that we’ve suffered a bus error, meaning that we tried to access an address that’s outside the valid range of memory,

which is a no-no, of course. The debugger also tells us that the program counter was
at $48678 when the bus error occurred, and that the address that the instruction
was trying to access was $50FF8053.

The bad address is indeed not a reasonable place to be looking for something
on this (or almost any) Macintosh. First of all, it has 32 bits of significant digits, and

we're running in 24-bit mode. Also, the address maps above the 1 gigabyte range,
which is somewhere in the realm of the addresses that control built-in I/O devices.
Our program has no business messing around here.

Since our program is hosed, we can stop looking for more bugs and investigate
this one a little more thoroughly. We'll start playing detective and see how much

information we can gather about the crash.
The first step is to look at the offending instruction at $48678. We can see what

the instruction is by looking at the disassembly that MacsBug thoughtfully provided when we crashed. You can see this disassembly in Figure 7-2.

Chapter7

Real Live Debugging

No procedure name

00048678

Figure 7-2.

*MOVEA.L

$0052(A3),A2

Disassembly of instruction in MacsBug

Can't get there from here. If you’re playing Follow the Bouncing Bug by
running the application while you're reading, you may notice that some of
the addresses you get are different from the ones given here. If so, it’s because

you're running a different version of the System, or maybe even a different
ROM, from the ones in our example. This shouldn’t affect the general behavior of things, though.

To see exactly why we got the bus error, we have to know what's in register A3,

since it forms part of the address that this instruction was trying to access. In
MacsBug, we can just look at the register display along the left side of the display,
or we can type RA3 to get the display shown in Figure 7-3. As you can see, adding

the contents of register A3 to the offset of 52 specified in the instruction gives us the
wacky address that caused the bus error, so we see that the debugger seems to be
telling the truth.

RA3

= $5OFF8001

Figure 7-3.

#1358921729

#1358921729

‘PRP...’

Register display

The single line of disassembly that MacsBug shows us when we crash is inter-

esting, but it’s a little confining. It would be nice to see more of what's going on, so
we issue an IL PC command to MacsBug that disassembles a hunk of instructions
starting at the current program counter, where we crashed (see Figure 7-4).

Now that we can see the next bunch of instructions, what are we really looking
for? We're trying to find some kind of familiaritiy in the instructions, anything that
would help us identify what’s happening. We can see from the

NewRgn, GetClip, .

and other calls that we’re nowhere in our application. Well, where are we? One
way to get additional clues is with MacsBug’s WH (where) command. By typing

WH PC, MacsBug will try to figure out where the program counter is. We see the
result in Figure 7-5.

201

202

PART TWO

Disassembling

DEBUGGING

from pc

No procedure name

_SetPort

00048680

SUBQ.W

00048682

_NewRgn

is

<mNUNI

;

A8D8

ete

A873

IE

(A7) ,-$000A(A6)

00048684—

MOVE .L

MOVE .L

0004868A

_GetClip

A873
594F

A8D8

2D57

FFF6

;

A87A

>

A87B

CEERI

2F17

I

$0008(A3)

PEA

A87A
486B

0008

_ClipRect

00048692

MOVE.L
©

$001C(A2),-(A7)

00048696

MOVE .L

(A7),-(A7)

00048698

_sectRgn

0004869A

MOVEA.L

$0052(A3),A0

206B

0052

0004869E

MOVE .W

$0044(A0),-S000E(A6)

3D68

0044

000486A4

BCLR

#$07,$0047(A0)

08A8

0007

0047

000486AA

MOVE .W

$0046(A0),-$0010(A6)

3D68

0046

FFFO

000486B0

MOVE .W

$004A(A0),-$0012(A6)

3D68

004A FFEE

000486B6

PEA

-~$0018(A6)

000486BA

TST.W

$0050(A3)

000486BE

BMI.S

*+SQ00E

UND

00048690

00048678

0002F938

Figure 7-5.

;

#$4,A7

©

00048688

is

00018D40 bytes

Start

©

A2,~(A7)

0052

2F0A

eC

2F2A 001Cc

A8E4

2F17
A8E4

NN

“HO

NL

:

A87B

486E FFES8

000486CC

HN

4AR6B
H

FFF2

0050

6BO0C

Disassembly from program counter

Address

It

mMhNONN

0004867E

246B

HIN

MOVE.L

SN

*MOVEA.L

0004867C

0004868C

Figure 7-4.

$0052(A3)
,A2

00048678

in the

System heap at

into this

Length

0003BFA4+00

Tag

00001500

heap block:

Mstr Ptr Lock Prg

Type

ID

File

Name

N

Result of WH PC command

This command doesn’t really help us this time around. MacsBug tells us that

the instruction is in the system heap, which verifies what we already knew: this
instruction isn't in our application. Does this mean that we’ve uncovered a bug in
system code? Not likely. Instead, our evil program probably did something wrong,

and it wasn’t caught until this poor instruction was executed.

Chapter7

Real Live Debugging

Let's use another technique to figure out where we crashed. We said in Chapter 5 that Macintosh routines usually create stack frames using register A6. MacsBug uses this fact to implement a feature called a stack crawl (SC), which examines
the linked A6é addresses and shows you the current nest of routine calls. If the A6
chain is intact, we can see the last routine that our application called before conking
out. Figure 7-6 shows the results of the SC command.

Calling chain using ‘AG links ~—
A6 Frame

Caller

|

top level 002BFE12 SHOWOFF+00BC

Figure 7-6.

Stack crawl

Now we're getting somewhere! According to this, the last stack frame was
created after a branch from the location at SHOWOFF plus $BC bytes (ShowOff is
the name of our program). Looking at this location should provide some interesting information, and we'll go there in just a moment.

Sometimes, the A6 chain is blown because of the crash, or incomplete because
of a routine that didn’t use a stack frame. If this is the case, another way to try to find
out what happened is to look at the traps that were seen by the trap record command, which we'll do in Figure 7-7. MacsBug records and displays the 16 most
recent traps, in the order they occurred. The one we're most interested in is the

most recent, which is listed last. This is call to the TEIdle trap. According to the line
that starts with PC, it comes from SHOWOFF + BC. This is really interesting: both

the stack crawl and the trap recording have said that one of the last things our
application did was to call TEIdle from $BC bytes into the main program. We can

Trap calls in the order in which ‘theyoccurred
A924 FrontWindow
PC

QO2BFCA4

A7

OO2DBI1E2

DOCOMMAND+00D6

0000 0000 0000 0000 0000 0000

AICD TEDispose
PC

=

002BFA9C

A7 = 002DB1D6

KILLWINDOW+000C

A914 DisposeWindow
PC

A7

Figure 7-7.

0O02BFAA2

002DB1D6

-

002B F800 002D B2F8 002B 002B FCAA
KILLWINDOW+001 2

|

002C 0818 002D B2F8 0028 FCAA

Recorded traps display

203

204

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

A924 _FrontWindow
PC

OO2BFAAC

KILLWINDOW+001C

Al

002DB1D6

0000 0000 002D B2F8 002B FCAA

A924. _FrontWindow
PC

=

QO2BFABE

KILLWINDOW+002E

A7

=

002DB1D6

0000

0000

002D B2F8

A93A

DisableItem

“PC

OO2BFADC

KILLWINDOW+004C

A7

002DB1D4

0001

PC

A9B4

=

OO2BFCF6

DOCOMMAND+0128

QO2DB1E4

0000

0000

0000

PC

= 002BFDC2 SHOWOFF+006C
=

002DB304

PC

A924

004C

I1BF2

0000

OO2BFDC6

SHOWOFF+0070

002DB300

0000

0000

004C

Hof

FrontWindow

AT

PC

0000

0660

0000 0000

0000

1BF2

0000

0000

1BF2

0000

0000

FrontWindow

A924

A972

0000

_SystemTask

A7

PC

002D B2F8 002B

HiliteMenu

A938

A7

002B F84C

002B FCAA

|

OO2BFDCE

SHOWOFF+0078

002DB300

0000

0000

004C

_GetMouse

=

QO2BFD16

FIXCURSOR+0008

AT = 002DB2F4
ASAD

002D B2F8 0000 0184 0000

PtInRect

PC

0OO2BFD26

FIXCURSOR+0018

AT

OO2DB2EE

0000

A9B9

GetCursor

B778

OOEF

0075

0000

0O0OEF

PC

OO2BFD32

FIXCURSOR+0024

AT

002DB2F2

0001 0000 0000 OOEF 0075 0000

A851

_SetCursor

=

Q002BFD38

FIXCURSOR+002A

AT =

QO02DB2F4

2000

PC

A924

ASDA

Hod

PC

AT

76AC

OOEF

OO2BFDE8

SHOWOFF+0092

OO2DB2FC

0000

01E4

0000

0000

0004

0001

004C

1BF2

1BF2

0000

0000

TEIdle

PC

OO2ZBFE12

SHOWOFF+00BC

AT

002DB300

0000

Figure 7-7.

0075

FrontWindow

Continued

0000

004C

Chapter7

205

Real Live Debugging

confirm that fact by looking at a disassembly of the code at SHOWOFF + $BC

shown in Figure 7-8.
Yep, this location contains a call to TEIdle. Back in Figure 7-7, the trap recording

also tells us another very important fact: the A7 line shows what was on the stack
when the call was made. For the TElIdle call, the top of the stack contained a long
word of zeroes. TEIdle takes a handle to a TextEdit record as its only parameter.
This is the cause of the crash! In the ROM, TElIdle attempted to use the zero
value that we passed to it as a handle to the TextEdit record. Like much of the ROM,

TEIdle doesn’t check for zero handles, and when it dereferenced the handle, it
simply treated the value zero as if it were the address of a master pointer. So, it got
the value at location zero and attempted to use it as a pointer to a TextEdit record.

Since this value was invalid ($50FF8001), a bus error soon followed.
In fact, a crash involving the number $50FF8001 or something similar is often
an indication that a zero handle was used somewhere and wasn’t immediately

Disassembling from showoff+bc
SHOWOFF

+00BC

O002BFE12
.. TEIdle

+00BE

002BFE14

MOVE.L

#$FFFF0000,-(A7)

oe

4 ASDA

| 2F3c

FFFF

+00C4

O02BFE1A

PEA

-$0034(A5)

| 486D

FFCC

+00C8

O02BFE1E

_GetNextEvent

; A970

+00CA
+00CC

O002BFE20
002BFE22

MOVE.B..
BEQ
=

(A7)+,D0
SHOWOFF+02AC

| 101F
; 002C0002 | 6700

+00D0

O002BFE26

MOVE.W

-$0034(A5),D0

+00D4

002BFE2A

SUBQ.W

#$1,D0

+00D6

O002BFE2C

BEQ.S

SHOWOFF+00F4.

+00D8

O02BFE2E

SUBQ.W

#$2,D0

+00DA

002BFE30

BEQ

SHOWOFF+01A6

+00DE

O002BFE34

SUBQ.W

#$2,D0

| A970
Q1DE

|

302D FFCC

|

5340

; OO2BFE4A | 671C
|
;

OO2BFEFC

a

5540

|

6700

|

5540

0OOCA

+00E0

002BFE36

BEQ

SHOWOFF+01A6

; 002BFEFC | 6700

00c4

+00E4
+00E6

002BFE3A
O002BFE3C

SUBQ.W
BEQ

#$1,D0
SHOWOFF+0284

| 5340
; O0O2BFFDA | 6700

019¢C

+00EA

O002BFE40

SUBQ.W

#$2,D0

+O00EC

O002BFE42

BEQ

SHOWOFF+01F0.

;

+00FO

O002BFE46

BRA

SHOWOFF+02AC

;

+00F4

O0O2BFE4A

CLR.W

-(A7)

+00F6

OO02BFE4C

£MOVE.L

+OOFA

OO2BFE50

PEA

Figure 7-8.

Disassembly from Showoff

=

| AODA

.

|

5540

OO2ZBFF46

|

6700 0102

002C0002

|

6000

|

4267

~$002A(A5),-(A7)

|

2F2D FFD6

-$00DC(A5)

|

486D FF24

01BA

0000

206

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

detected. Where does this funny number come from? Several Macintosh debugging tools put this value in location 0 just to help catch rotten code.
Why this number? It happens to be a really nasty value. It’s odd, which causes
an address error on 68000 machines. It’s an invalid address on every Macintosh
model so far, which causes a bus error on every non-68000 Macintosh. Finally, it’s
also an invalid instruction in the 68000 family, which means that if the system starts
executing code at location 0 due to bad advice, things will come to a screeching halt
with yet another error. So, putting this value in location 0 is a really good way to
make the Macintosh crash when a zero handle is used.

Discovering that we called TEIdle (Nil) is a major step in getting rid of this bug.
Now we have to determine why we called TEIdle with this bad value. Looking at
the source listing, we see that the code reads TEIdle (textH). Apparently, textH is
being set to Nil and the TEIdle call is causing the crash. We have to find out where
and why this is happening so that we can prevent it.

Since this crash occurred so readily —just by closing a window—we can make
a reasonable assumption that it’s repeatable. We'll try running the program again,

this time under a closer watch. Before rerunning the program, we should do some
final looking around just to see if there are any more interesting clues to this
problem. One thing we should certainly do is check to see if the heap has been
trashed. MacsBug includes a heap check command (HC) that examines the current
heap zone for inconsistencies. A heap check reveals that the heap seems to be OK.
Finding no other clues to the nature of this problem, we can now restart the
program and take a closer look. Since the system has crashed with a bus error, we

probably won't be able to exit normally, so we'll use the ES command that returns
to the Finder.

Watching more closely
When we restart the application, we’ll again try closing a window, but this time
we'll watch things much more closely. In particular, we'll trace through the program as it handles the Close command to see exactly what's going on.

Since the problem occurs when we close a window, we can start the application
normally. Then we need to pick an easily found spot to stop the program and enter

the debugger. There are two strategies for this: find a fairly unique ROM call in the
program and tell the debugger to break on that ROM call or find the right spot in
the source program and set a break point there.

One thing we could do is tell the debugger to break every time it encounters
the GetNextEvent trap. Since we know that the application calls GetNextEvent,
this will certainly give control to the debugger. However, if you try this, you'll see
why it’s a bad idea that can lead to insanity: because GetNextEvent is called so

frequently (every tick or so), the program is constantly interrupted, and there’s no
way to get it to stop when we really want it to. What we need is a more restrictive
way of breaking into the debugger.

Chapter7

Real Live Debugging

In this example, we know that the main event loop calls the program’s proce-

dure DoCommand whenever there’s a MouseDown event in the menu bar. If we’re
confident that the program is working at least this far (that is, the DoCommand

procedure is in fact getting called when we select a menu item), we can set a break
point at the location called DoCommand.
The MPW Pascal compiler thoughtfully embeds procedure and function
names in compiled code so that debuggers can use these names as symbols. We can

set a break point by entering MacsBug and typing BR DoCommand. It will respond
by figuring out where DoCommand is and then setting a break point there. We can
then return to the application with the G command. The application will run
normally until it hits the break point, that is, until we do something that causes

DoCommand to be executed, like pulling down a menu and choosing the Close

command, which is exactly where we want it to stop.
So we start up the application and then use the File menu to open a couple
more windows. At this point, the screen has three windows called Window 1,

Window 2, and Window 3. We then press the interrupt button to get into the debugger
and set the break point at DoCommand. After typing G to exit the debugger, we

pull down the File menu and choose Close. The Close item blinks, the menu goes
away, and we’re instantly zapped into the debugger. This time, though, instead of

the dreaded Bus Error message, the debugger tells us that we've hit a break point.
Nothing has gone wrong; the debugger has just followed our instructions by
taking control upon reachinga certain location.
As we trace through the application, we should always keep the phrase “reality check” in mind. This means that, as often as possible, we should examine the
parameters to ROM calls and their effects to make sure that what's happening is
exactly what we intended. It’s very important to keep our minds on red alert while

we're doing this. Don’t take anything for granted. Think hard about the code that's
being executed, and check out anything questionable or unexpected.
Now we can start tracing through DoCommand, with our source code close at
hand. Figure 7-9 shows the disassembly of the first part of DoCommand. We can
move through DoCommand with either the Trace command or the Step command.
In general, we'll use Trace, because it treats ROM calls as single instructions. If we
need to follow an instruction into the ROM, we can use the Step command. As we
trace, we'll look at the source code so that we know more about what's going on.

Warning. Becareful about using the Step command to walk through the ROM.
Many trap calls do a lot of processing, like several hundred instructions worth.
Unless you really think tracing into the ROM will give you important information, you should avoid doing it or you might be tracing for a long, long time.
If you do get stuck in the ROM and you decide you want to get out, you
can do so by using the MR (magic return) command before tracing past a JSR
or BSR.

207

208

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Disassembling from docommand
DOCOMMAND
+0000

QO2BFBCE

LINK

A6,#SFEFA

|

4E56 FEFA

+0004

0O02BFBD2

MOVEM.L

D5-D7 ,-(A7)

|

48E7 0700

+0008

OO2BFBD6

CLR.W

-(A7)

|

4267

+000A

0O02BFBD8

$MOVE.L

$0008(A6),-(A7)

os,

| 2F2E 0008

+000E

00O2BFBDC

—_LoWord

+0010

0O2BFBDE

MOVE.W

(A7)+,D7

; A86B

|

3E1F

+0012

OO2BFBEO

CLR.W

—(A7)

|

4267

+0014

0O02BFBE2

MOVE.L

$0008(A6),-(A7) _

|

2F2E 0008

+0018

OO2BFBE6

HiWord

; A86A

| A86B

| A86A

+001A

QO2BFBE8

MOVE.W

(A7)+,D6

|

3C1F

+001C

002BFBEA

MOVE.W

D6, DO

|

3006

+001E

QO2BFBEC

SUBI.W

#$0080,D0

+0022

OO0O2BFBFO

BEQ.S

DOCOMMAND+0032

+0024

OO2BFBF2

SUBQ.W

#$1,D0

| 0440 0080
0O2BFCOO0

|

+0026

OO2BFBF4

BEQ.S

DOCOMMAND+009E

+0028

OO2BFBF6

SUBQ.W

#$1,D0

—+002A

OO2BFBF8

BEQ

DOCOMMAND+00E6

Figure 7-9.

;

|

670E

| 5340
;
;

OO2ZBFC6C
OO2BFCB4

|

6776

|

5340

|

6700

OOBA

Disassembly from DoCommand

Stepping through the first two instructions, we see that Pascal begins the
procedure with the usual Link instruction and then saves three registers (D5

through D7), which it will no doubt use for optimization in the procedure. It then
calls LoWord and HiWord on the parameter mResult and puts the results into D7

and D6, respectively. Then it begins the grand production of a case statement. It

begins by copying the value of the variable theMenu, the case selector, into register
D0. Since the case statement labels are appleID, fileID, and editID (128, 129, and
130), it then subtracts 128 (which is hex $80) from this value to “normalize” it, that
is, to put it into the range 0 through 2. This leaves a 1 in DO.

There’s a BEQ instruction that will execute the appleID portion of code if the
selector is zero. In our case, the selector is one, so the branch is not taken. The next
instruction, SUBQ.W #1,D0, leaves D0 at zero, so the branch-if-equal is taken. This

corresponds to taking the fileID branch of the case statement in the object code.

As we're stepping through the object code in this way, we're following along in

the source code listing to see if anything unexpected is happening, like a branch to
the wrong label or surprising results from an assignment statement. So far every-

thing has happened as we expected it to.

Chapter7

209

Real Live Debugging

The fileID branch of the theMenu case is another case statement: case theItem
of Figure 7-10 shows the object code for this case statement. You may recall that the

compiler stashed theMenu in register D7 when it called LoWord at the start of the
procedure. Here the compiler prepares for the case statement by copying this value
into scratch register D0, since it’s about to start subtracting from it to find the right
case to branch to. In our program, D0 is set to 3, the value of closeItem, which is the

item we selected from the menu.

The cases of this case statement are newltem, closeItem, and quitItem, constants that have the values 1, 3, and 5, respectively. So the case statement first tests

for newltem (1) by subtracting 1 from D0 and branching to the appropriate code if
it’s equal. In our example, this leaves 2 in DO, so the branch is not taken. The next
instruction subtracts 2 from D0, leaving it at zero for the next BEQ test, so the branch
is taken. In the source code, this will cause the closeItem code to be executed.

Just in case.

Why did the case statement code first subtract 1, then 2, in

testing the case selector? The compiler knows that the difference between the

first two case labels (newltem and closeltem, or 1 and 3) is 2. There’s no point
in testing for theltem = 2, since there’s no case label set up to handle it; the

compiler just tests for values that are used. One brownie point for the

compiler.

_

|

The branch has taken us to the code for the closeltem case (see Figure 7-11).
First, the program calls FrontWindow and checks that window’s WindowKind
field to see if it’s less than zero, TST.W $006C(A0O), since WindowKind is $6C bytes
from the start of the window record. In our case it’s not, and the next instruction
(BGE) causes a branch to the else part of the if statement. This code first calls

Disassembling from docommand
D7,D0

SUBQ.W

#$1,D0

+00A2

OO2BFC70

BEQ.S

DOCOMMAND+00AE

+00A4

O002BFC72

SUBQ.W

#$2,D0

+00A6

OO2BFC74

BEQ.S

DOCOMMAND+00B4

3007

5340
>

OO2ZBFC7C

670A

;

OO2ZBFC82

670C

5540

+00A8

O02BFC76

SUBQ.W

#$2,D0

+00AA

QO2BFC78

BEQ.S

DOCOMMAND+00DE

;

O0O2BFCAC

+00AC

OO2BFC7A

BRA.S

DOCOMMAND+0126

;

OO2BFCF4

Figure 7-10.

Disassembly from DoCommand

Se

MOVE .W

5540
TT

O02BFC6C

O02BFC6E

—

+009E

+00A0

6732

6078

PART TWO

Disassembling

DEBUGGING

from docommand

+00B4

OO2BFC82

CLR.L

+00B6

002BFC84

—_FrontWindow

~(A7)

|

+00B8

O002BFC86

$MOVEA.L

(A7)+,A0

|

205F

+00OBA

O02BFC88

#£TST.W

$006C(A0)

|

4A68

+00BE

002BFC8C

BGE.S

DOCOMMAND+00CE

+00CO

O02BFC8E

CLR.L

-(A7)

+00C2

002BFC90

—FrontWindow

+00C4

002BFC92

MOVEA.L

(A7)+,A0

|

205F

+00C6

O002BFC94

MOVE.W

$006C(A0),-(A7)

|

3F28

+00CA

O002BFC98

+00CC

002BFC9A

BRA.S

DOCOMMAND+0126

+00CE

OO2BFC9C

CLR.L

—(A7)

+00D0

O02BFC9E

—_FrontWindow

+00D2

002BFCA0

—_DisposeWindow

+00D4

OO2BFCA2

CLR.L

+00D6

O02BFCA4

—FrontWindow

;

=CloseDeskAcc

A924

42A7

| A924

;

OO2BFC9C

|

6COE

|

42A7

;

A924

| A924

;

A9B7

| A9B7

;

OO2BFCF4

|

6058

|

42A7

;

A924

| A924

;

A914

|

-(A7)
;

A924
OO2BFA90

A914
42A7

|

A924

|

4EBA FDE8

+00D8

OO02BFCA6

JSR

KILLWINDOW

;

002BFCAA

BRA.S

DOCOMMAND+0126

; OO2BFCF4

| 6048

+00DE

O02BFCAC

MOVE.B

#$01,-$0024(A5)

|

1B7C

+00E4

002BFCB2

BRA.S

DOCOMMAND+0126

;

|

6040

Figure 7-11.

006C

|

+00DC

OO2BFCF4

006C

0001

FFDC

Disassembly from DoCommand

DisposeWindow on the frontmost window and then calls the program’s procedure

KallWindow with FrontWindow as a parameter.
Now let's trace into the KillWindow procedure (Figure 7-12). After the usual
LINK instruction to create the local stack frame, the code calls TEDispose on the

window record’s TextEdit record. Then the program calls DisposeWindow on the
window record. Wait a minute—déja vu! Didn’t we just call DisposeWindow on
this windowa few instructions ago, back in DoCommand, before we even called
KillWindow? Yep, we sure did.
50 what are we disposing of here? To find out, all we have to do is look at the
parameter we just pushed on the stack. Before calling DisposeWindow, the top of

the stack contains a pointer to the window we're about to dispose of. We can
display this window record. You can see this display in Figure 7-13.
The window we’re about to dispose of is Window 2; we can tell by looking at
the titleHandle field of the display. But when we selected Close, Window 3 was the
frontmost. Why are we now disposing of a different window?

Chapter7

Real Live Debugging

211

Disassembling from killwindow
KILLWINDOW

+0000

O0O2BFA90

LINK

A6 ,#$0000

+0004

O02BFA94

MOVEA.L

~§$0008(A6)-.,A0

+0008

O02BFA98

MOVE.L

$0098(A0) ,-(A7)

+000C

O02BFA9C

—_TEDispose

+000E

O02BFA9E

MOVE.L

+0012

002BFAA2

_DisposeWindow

+0014

OO2BFAA4

#MOVEQ

#$00,D0

|

+0016

O02BFAA6

MOVE.L

DO,-$0020(A5)

| 2B40 FFEO

-(A7)

OO02BFAAA

CLR.L

O02BFAAC

_FrontWindow
._

+001E

OO2BFAAE

TST.L

(A7)+

AQCD

| A9CD

|

|

; A914

|

.

a

+0020

O02BFABO

BNE.S

KILLWINDOW+002C

0O02BFAB2

MOVE.L

-$0008(A5),-(A7)

+0026

002BFAB6

MOVE.W

#$0003,~-(A7)

+002A

O02BFABA

DisableItem

+002C

O0O2BFABC

CLR.L

+002E

O002BFABE

—_FrontWindow

+0030

O002BFACO

MOVEA.L

+0032

OO2BFAC2

TST.W

$006C(A0)

+0036

OO2BFAC6

BGE.S

KILLWINDOW+0044

+0038

O02BFAC8

MOVE.L

~$0004(A5) ,-(A7)

+003C

002BFACC

MOVE.W

#$0001,-(A7)

+0040

O02BFAD0

—_EnableItem

2F2E 0008

| a914

; A924

+0022

0000

|. 206E 0008
;

+001C

4E56

| 2F28 0098

$0008(A6),-(A7)

+001A

; OO2ZBFABC

7000
42a7

| ag2a
|

4A9F

| 660A

| 2F2DB FFF8

oe,
;

»| 3F3c 0003

A93A

| AQ3A

; A924

| A924

~(A7)

| 42A7
|

(A7)+,A0

|

+0042

002BFAD2

BRA.S

KILLWINDOW+004E

+0044

OO02BFAD4

MOVE.L

-~$0004(A5),—-(A7)

+0048

002BFAD8

MOVE.W

#$0001,~(A7)

+004C

O002BFADC

_DisableItem

| 205F
| 4A68 006C
;

OO2BFAD4

|

O02BFADE

UNLK

A6

+0050

O002BFAEO

MOVE.L

(A7)+, (A7)

+0052

O02BFAE2

RTS

6COC

| 2F2D FFFC

|

| 3F3¢ 0002

; A939

;

| A939

OO2BFADE

|

600A

| 2F2D FFFC

| 3F3c 0001
; A93A

+004E

Figure 7-12.

|

|

Disassembly from KillWindow

For clues, we need to look at the source listing. The source line that generated
this code is DisposeWindow (theWindow) in the KillWindow procedure. Where
did theWindow come from? It’s the parameter that was passed to KillWindow by
the caller, DoCommand.

Let’s backtrack and see how DoCommand passed the wrong window pointer
to KillWindow. Looking back in the source at the line that called this procedure, we

| A93A
|

4E5E

| 2E9F
|

4E75

212

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Displaying WindowRecord at

002BCC74

002BCC84

portRect

#0 #0 #133 #200

002BCC8C
002BCC90

visRgn
clipRgn

002BBC78 ~> 002BD130 ->
002BBC74 -> 002BD234 ->

0O2BCCEO

windowKind

0008

0O02BCCE2

visible

TRUE

002BCCE3

hilited

TRUE

002BCCE4

goAwayFlag

TRUE

0O02BCCE5

spareFlag

FALSE

OQOO2BCCE6

strucRgn

002BBC70

-—->

O002BD7DC

->

Q0OO2BCCEA

contRgn

OO2BBC6C -—>

Q02BD6A4

->

OO2BCCEE

updateRgn

002BBC68
-> 002BD6B8
—>

Q02BCCF2

windowDefProc

0400B584.—> 6009A160
—>

00Q2BCCF6

dataHandle

OO2BBC5C ->

002BD824

—>

OO2BCCFA

titleHandle

002BBC64

002BD810

->

OO2BCCFE

titleWidth

0040

0OO2BCD00

controlList

NIL

002BCD04

nextWindow

002BCBD0
->

002BCD08

windowPic

NIL

O0OO2BCD0C

refCon

O0OO02BBC60

Figure 7-13.

->

Window 2

|
.

Window display

see that it says KillWindow (FrontWindow). Reality check time. What’s FrontWin-

dow? It’s a ROM function that returns the frontmost window. Isn’t that what we
wanted to pass to KillWindow? Think about it: before we called KillWindow, we’d

already called DisposeWindow on the frontmost Window (Window 3); this caused
Window 2 to move up to the front. When KillWindow (FrontWindow) was exe-

cuted, FrontWindow had become Windowz2. That’s why KillWindow is about to

dispose of it: DoCommand called it with a screwy parameter. So paying attention
has enabled us to catch a bug we hadn’t even noticed yet. We'll resolve to watch
ROM-call parameters even more closely from now on.

We're not so smart.

If we had been in superparanoid mode, we might have

noticed this bug when we called KillWindow (if you did—congratulations!).
If we were doing strong reality checks, we could have checked the window
pointer returned by FrontWindow with the Template function and would

have seen that it wasn’t the window we expected. In practice, though, this
kind of vigilance is hard to maintain. It takes a long time to check every
parameter to every call. If you're looking for an elusive bug, though....

Chapter7

Real Live Debugging

213

The problem here is that we’re calling DisposeWindow twice, where once

would do. Which one should we leave in? If we dispose of the window before
calling KillWindow, the window pointer that we pass to KillWindow is invalid,

because the window record has been deallocated. For this reason, we should fix this
problem by removing the DisposeWindow call before calling KillWindow.

Could this silly bug have caused the bus error we got the first time? No, because
we already know that we have to call TEIdle to cause the error, as we discovered
earlier on in our travels. So, the search continues.

Looking for the bus error
After disposing of Window 2, the code sets the variable hText to Nil, since there’s no
longer an active TextEdit record. Then it checks to see if FrontWindow is Nil, that

is, if there are no windows. Since there is still another window, even though our
mad program has closed two for the price of one, FrontWindow is not Nil and the

BNE is taken (see Figure 7-12).
Here the if statement that ends KillWindow is executed. It checks to see if the
new frontmost window is a desk accessory (for System 6 compatibility) by looking

at its windowKind field; if this value is less than zero, it’s a desk accessory. In our
example, of course, it’s not a desk accessory, so we jump to the else part of the

statement, which disables the Undo menu item, since it’s only supported for desk
accessories. Then the procedure finishes up by unbuilding the stack frame and
incrementing the stack pointer past the parameter—standard stuff.

Now that we’re done with KillWindow, we've returned to the end of DoCommand (Figure 7-14). The last statement in DoCommand is HiliteMenu (0), and then
the procedure packs up and goes home.
Well, we’ve now traced all the way through DoCommand and KillWindow

and we haven't found the original error yet. Debugging requires persistence, so
don’t get tired yet. It’s not unheard of to have to trace for hours to find a bug (that
probably doesn't surprise you, though).
When DoCommand returns, it returns to the end of the main event loop, to the

until doneFlag test, which is the end of the giant repeat-until loop that forms the

Disassembling

+0126

from docommand+126

004483B4

CLR.W

..

~(AT7)

+0128

004483B6

HiliteMenu

+012A

004483B8

MOVEM.L

(A7)+,D5-D7

+012E

004483BC

UNLK

AG

+0130

004483BE

MOVE.L

(A7)+, (AT) —

+0132

004483C0

RTS

Figure 7-14.

|

Disassembly from DoCommand

7

>

A938

00E0

214

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

main event loop. This test fails, of course, since doneFlag is false, so the program
branches back up to the beginning of the main event loop to do it all again. So will we.
The next chunk of code is displayed in Figure 7-15. The first thing in the loop,
as confirmed by our source listing, is a call to SystemTask. Since this call takes no

Disassembling from showoff+6c
+006C

0O02BFDC2

_SystemTask

+006E

OO2BFDC4

CLR.L

+0070.

002BFDC6

—FrontWindow

TST.L

(A7)+

+0074| 002BFDCA

BEQ.S
CLR.L

SHOWOFF+0086
—(A7)

; A924

| A924

| 4A9F

+0078

Q02BFDCE

—FrontWindow

+007A.

0O2BFDD0

MOVEA.L

(A7)+,A0

+007C

OO2BFDD2

TST.W

$006C(A0)

SHOWOFF+0086
FIXCURSOR

+0080
— OO2BFDD6

| A9B4
| 42A7

+0072. Q02BFDC8

+0076 -002BFDCC

> AQB4

~(A7)

|

; 002BFDDc
. | 6710
| 42a7
; A924

| ag924
| 205F
| 4A68 006C

+0082.

002BFDD8

BLT.S ©
JSR

+0086

002BFDDC

MOVE.B

~$01ED(A5),DO

|

102D FE13

+008A

002BFDEOQ

EORI.B

#$01,D0

|

OAOO 0001

+008E

0O2BFDE4

MOVE.L

DO,-(A7)

| 2F00

+0090

OO2BFDE6

CLR.L

-(A7)

+0092: OQ02BFDE8

; OO2BFDDC
| 6D04
gs Q02BFDOE = |s 4EBA PF34

|

=FrontWindow

7 A924

42A7

| A924

+0094 ““Q02BFDEA

MOVE.L

(A7)+,D1

| 221F

+0096 002BFDEC

MOVE.L

(A7)+,D0

| 201F

+0098

QO2BFDEE

TST.L

D1

| 4A81

+009A

QO2BFDFO

SEQ

D1

+009C

OO2BFDF2

AND.B

D1,D0

+0095
- O02BFDF4
+00A0

“O002BFDF6

|
|

BEQ.S

SHOWOFF+00B8

MOVE.L.

-$0008(A5),-(A7)

#$0003,-(A7)

57¢1

| cool
; OO2ZBFEOE

|

6718

| 2F2D FFF8

+00A4.

002BFDFA

MOVE.W

+00A8

O02BFDFE

_DisableItem

+00AA

QO2BFEOO0

MOVE.L

-$0004(A5),—-(A7)

|

2F2D FFFC

+00AE

OO2BFE04

CLR.W

~(A7)

|

4267

+00B0

002BFEQ6

_DisableItem

+00B2

OO2BFEOQ8

$MOVE.B

#$01,-S01ED(A5)

|

1B7C 0001 FE13

+00B8.

QOO2BFEQOE

MOVE.L

~$0020(A5),-(A7)

|

2F2D FFEO

+00BC

QO2BFE12

TEIdle

+00BE

002BFE14

MOVE.L

#SFFFF0000,-(A7)

+00C4

OO2BFE1A

PEA

-$0034(A5)

+00C8

-Q02BFE1E

Figure 7-15.

| 3F3Cc 0003
; AQ3A

; AQ3A

;

—_GetNextEvent

Disassembly from Showoff

AQDA

| A93A

| A93A

| ASDA

| 2F3C FFFF 0000
|

; A970

486D FFCC

| A970

Chapter7

215

Real Live Debugging

parameters, there’s nothing that can go wrong. The program next checks to see if
FrontWindow is Nil; it’s not, so it then looks to see if the frontmost window is an

application window. Since it is, it calls the FixCursor procedure.
You can see FixCursor’s object code in Figure 7-16. It looks pretty harmless, but
we
ll trace through it just in case. It begins by calling GetMouse and then tests to see

if the coordinate returned by GetMouse is in the current GrafPort’s port rectangle.

If so, it sets the cursor to the I-beam; if not, the cursor is set to an arrow. The
procedure then does its epilog and returns to the caller. Hmmm... guess it was

harmless after all.

Disassembling from fixcursor
FIXCURSOR

:

+0000

O02BFD0E

LINK

A6,#$FFFC

|

4E56

FFFC

+0004

O0O2BFD12

PEA

-$0004(A6)

|

486E

FFFC

+0008. 002BFD16 _GetMouse

+000A O002BFD18
+000C 002BFD1A

CLR.W
MOVE.L

;

A972

| A972

— -(A7)
= —$0004(A6),-(A7)

|
|

-$03AC(A5),A0

|

+0010

O0O2BFDIE

MOVEA.L

+0014

O02BFD22

PEA

+0018

O002BFD26

=PtInRect

-

°$0010(A0)

|

oe

4267
2F2E

|

4868

; ASAD

|

A8AD

|

101F

;

|

6710

+001A

O002BFD28

MOVE.B

(A7)+,D0_

+001C

O02BFD2A

BEQ.S

FIXCURSOR+002E

+001E

O02BFD2C

CLR.L

-(A7)

|

42A7

+0020

O02BFD2E

MOVE.W

-#$0001,-(A7)

|

3F3C

+0024

002BFD32

_GetCursor

+0026

O002BFD34

MOVEA.L

(A7)+,A0

|

+0028

O02BFD36

##MOVE.L

(A0),~(A7)

|

2F10

+002A

002BFD38

_SetCursor

; A851

|

A851

+002C

O002BFD3A
O002BFD3C

BRA.S

FIXCURSOR+0034

; 0O02BFD42

|

6006

+002E

PEA

-~$0418(A5) —

+0032

002BFD40

—_SetCursor

+0034

O02BFD42

UNLK

+0036

OO02BFD44

RTS

Figure 7-16.

"

Disassembly from FixCursor

_

.

OO2BFD3Cc_

; A9B9

; A851
AG

FFFC

206D FC54
0010

0001

| A9B9
205F

|

486D

|

A851

|

4E5E

|

4E75

FBE8

216

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Stamina check.

Don’t bail out yet! I know it seems like we’ve been tracing

for a long time and haven't found the address error yet. After a little practice,

and without having to read this narrative, you'll be able to do all the tracing
we've done so far in about ten minutes, so this is still considered a lightweight
debugging session. Go get something to drink, then continue.

Next, back in Figure 7-15, the program checks the global menusOK. This variable is used to help adjust the menus if there are no windows open. The code looks
at menusOK to see if it’s false (zero) and then calls FrontWindow. If menusOK is

false and there are no windows, it does some menu fixing; in our case, FrontWindow is not Nil, so the BEQ to the next statement is taken.
The next statement in the source calls TEIdle with the parameter textH. Hold
on—we know that the original error was caused by calling TEIdle with a Nil

handle, and, yes, we did set textH to Nil a while ago. Let’s do a reality check:
examine the parameter textH [—20(A5)] after it’s pushed on the stack. Sure
enough, it’s zero, which is the value for Nil. We found it! Just to make sure (another
reality check), let’s try to single-step through the TEldle. As soon as we do, we get
the same bus error we got before.
Now that we've found the problem, we have to decide howto

fix it. What's the

value that should have been passed to TEIdIe? Well, TEIdIe is called with the
currently active TextEdit record. At the moment, we don’t have an active TextEdit

record: we just closed a window, and we'll get an active TextEdit record when the
new frontmost window’s activate event is handled. So we don’t know what Text-

Edit record to activate. Also, consider the case of the last window on the screen.
When we close it, there’s no TextEdit record to idle until another window is
opened.
It seems that a reasonable thing to do is to test textH to see if it’s Nil and, if not,

to call TEIdle. If it is Nil, there’s nothing to do. So we'll change the TElIdle (textH)
statement to it textH < > Nil then TEIdle (textH). This should fix the address-error

problem.
At some point in debugging a program that still has several bugs to be chased,

you have to decide when to end a debugging session and rebuild the program with
the fixes you've decided on. It’s usually a good time to do this when you fix a fatal
bug that has no work-around. In this case, we've just fixed a fatal bug that we can
work around by not closing any windows.
Whether to rebuild now is a judgment call. Some programmers like to imple-

ment fixes and rebuild their programs after every minor change; most, however, find
this too time consuming and save up several changes to add at one time. You decide.

Chapter7

Magic.

Real Live Debugging

Sometimes it’s useful or fun to try a potential fix to a program with-

out rebuilding the program. If you're pretty comfortable writing assembly
language or you like to experiment, you can do this by applying a patch to the

program. This means that you actually modify the object code right before
your very eyes. Obviously, thisis hard to do if it’s not a simple change. But if

it is an easy change, such as a constant10 that should have been 20, you can
use the debugger’s ability to change bytes in memory to modify the program.
Some debuggers even have built-in assemblers, as in TMON’s Disassembly
window, so you can actually modify the instruction, not just data. Patching
your code on the fly like thisis interesting and can be usefulin testing pro-

posed changes, but don’t forget to rebuild the program with the change
applied to the sourcecode!

:

In this case, we won't rebuild the application right now. We'll just rerun it and
avoid closing any windows.

Finding the text bug
We can restart the application after using ES to return to the Finder. Just to refresh

your memory, we observed two other problems that we need to track down. The
first was the odd behavior of text in windows: no blinking insertion point and no
unhighlighting of old selections when a new selection was made. The second

problem was windows going blank when we dragged other windows around.
Let’s think about the first problem for a moment. The instruction that makes
the insertion point blink is TEIdle. We’ve already discovered that we’ve been
calling TEIdle with a Nil handle after closing a window. Could that bug be causing

this problem too? One way to find out is to instruct the debugger to record TEIdle
calls and then examine the calls.

We enter the debugger in the usual way, by pressing the interrupt button. We
then use MacsBug’s ATT command to display information about TElIdle calls by

typing in this line: ATT TEIdle. We exit the debugger, let the application run for a
few seconds, and press interrupt again. We can then examine the traced traps (see
Figure 7-17).

In every case we've recorded in this table, the TEIdle call was passed the same
value as its parameter. A quick check with the DM command shows that this

appears to be a good handle to a real TextEdit record. Also, our recording shows
that we're not calling TEIdle (Nil) as long as there’s an active TextEdit record. So it

seems that the lack of a blinking insertion point can’t be blamed on bad calls (or lack
of calls) to TEIdle.

What else could be going wrong? Let’s think about the basics of displaying text

with TextEdit. We can use Inside Macintosh for help. According to the Using

217

pe

218

PART

TWO

DEBUGGING

ASDA TEIdle

PC=004484D2 A7=004639CO A7~=0044

7EFO

004C

1BF2

A9DA TEIdle

PC=004484D2 A7=004639C0 A7~=0044

7EFO

004C

1BF2

A9DA TEIdle

PC=004484D2 A7=004639C0 A77=0044 7EFO 004C 1BF2

ASDA TEIdle

PC=004484D2 A7=004639C0 A7~=0044

7EFO

004C

1BF2

A9DA TEIdle

PC=004484D2 A7=004639C0

A7°~=0044

7EFO

004C

1BF2

ASDA TEIdle

PC=004484D2

A7*=0044

7EFO

004C

1BF2

ASDA TEIdle

PC=004484D2 A7=004639C0 A77*=0044

7EFO

004C

1BF2

ASDA TEIdle

PC=004484D2 A7=004639C0

A7*=0044

7EFO

004C

1BF2

ASDA TEIdle

PC=004484D2

A7~=0044

7EFO

004C

1BF2

ASDA TEIdle

PC=004484D2 A7=004639CO0 A7~*=0044

7EFO

004C

1BF2

A7=004639C0

A7=004639C0

ASDA TEIdle

PC=004484D2 A7=004639CO0 A7~=0044

7EFO

004C

1BF2

ASDA TEIdle

PC=004484D2 A7=004639CO0

A7~=0044

7EFO

004C

1BF2

ASDA TEIdle

PC=004484D2

A7=004639CO

A7~=0044

7EFO

004C

1BF2

ASDA TEIdle

PC=004484D2

A7=004639C0

A7~=0044

7EFO

004C

1BF2

ASDA TEIdle

PC=004484D2 A7=004639C0

A7*=0044

7EFO

004C

1BF2

A9DA TEIdle

PC=004484D2 A7=004639C0

A77~=0044

7EFO

004C

1BF2

ASDA TEIdle

PC=004484D2 A7=004639C0

A77~=0044

7EFO

004C

1BF2

ASDA TEIdle

PC=004484D2

A7=004639C0

A7~=0044

7EFO

004C

1BF2

ASDA TEIdle

PC=004484D2

A7=004639C0

A7~*=0044

7EFO

004C

1BF2

ASDA TEIdle

PC=004484D2

A7=004639C0

A7~=0044

7EFO

004C

1BF2

ASDA TEIdle

PC=004484D2

A7=004639C0

A7~=0044

7EFO

004C

1BF2

ASDA TEIdle

PC=004484D2

A7=004639C0 A7*=0044

7EFO

004C

1BF2

ASDA TEIdle

PC=004484D2

A7=004639C0

A7~=0044

7EFO

004C

1BF2

A9DA TEIdle

PC=004484D2

A7=004639CO A7~=0044

7EFO

004C

1BF2

Figure 7-17.

Trap trace display

TextEdit section of Inside Macintosh’s TextEdit chapter, we start by calling TEInit;
we call TENew to allocate a new TextEdit record; TEIdle is used to make the
insertion point blink; and TEActivate is used to highlight the text or to display an

insertion point when the window becomes active. That's all there is to it.
Are we doing these things? A quick check of the beginning of the main pro-

gram shows that we do call TEInit; let’s set up the debugger to catch calls to the
other traps. We'll set a break point to look for TENew. After setting up this command, we return to the application and then open a new window. As the window
opens, we enter the debugger. The disassembly is shown in Figure 7-18, along with

the top of the stack.
We can single-step through the TENew call to see if it returns a valid handle.

After stepping through TENew, there’s a reasonable-looking handle on the top of
the stack. Doing a reality check on this handle by looking at it with the DM command
shows that it’s a real TextEdit record, so the call to TENew seems to have worked.

Chapter7

Real Live Debugging

219

Disassembling from pc
OPENWINDOW
+009A

004480C8

* TENew

+009C

004480CA

MOVE.L

+00A0

004480CE

MOVE.L

;

A9D2

(A7)+,-$0020(AS)

|

A9D2

| 2B5F FFEO

~$00D4(A5),-$00D8(A5)

|

2B6D FF2C

Displaying memory from ra7
00463792

Figure 7-18.

0046

3E24

0046

3E24

0000

0000

0857

696E

eF>SeF>Seceseewin

Disassembly from OpenWindow and top of stack

Now that we know that TENew is being called properly, we need to check to
make sure that TEActivate is getting called when the new window’s activate event

is handled. To do this, we set a break point for TEActivate and return to the
application. It should zap right back into the debugger when in encounters the
TEActivate ... but it doesn’t! Is the program hung? No, it still seems fully func-

tional: we can drag windows, pull down menus, and type normally.
So what happened to TEActivate? For some reason, it was never called. To see
if we can figure out why, let’s take a look at the source code for the activate
event-handling case of the main event loop.

A quick look at the source listing shows why TEActivate isn’t getting called: it’s
not there! Apparently we just forgot to put it in the program! Nice bug, eh? It seems
we can fix this one just by adding a TEActivate call to the activate event-handling code.
This kind of numb-brained error is often called a gross bug because it’s so
massive and obvious. Of course, I’ve never created a bug like this, and neither have
you. Right?

Finding the window-erase bug
Now we can go looking for the other problem that we discovered: the front win-

dow getting erased when we drag it off another window. Let's think: what can
cause a window’s text to be erased? One likely cause is an inadvertent call to
EraseRect. The application calls EraseRect in its update event-handling code.
Maybe we're erasing the wrong rectangle.
To find out, we can tell the debugger to intercept EraseRect calls that are made
from code in the application heap. First, we open two windows. We type some text
into each window and then drag Window 2 on top of Window 1, making Window
2 the frontmost. Then we drag Window 2 away, uncovering Window 1. When we
do this, the debugger kicks in as soon as it finds the EraseRect call in the update

event-handling code.
Before we step through the EraseRect, let’s do a reality check on its parameter,

which is the rectangle that’s about to be erased. The top of the stack holds to this

FF28

220

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

rectangle. To see the rectangle, we can use DM (see Figure 7-19). The rectangle’s
coordinates appear to have the proper dimensions for one of our window’s port
rectangles (0,0, $85, $C8).

Displaying memory from @ra7
00448540

Figure 7-19.

0000 0000 0085 00C8

0044 7F04 0044°7F08 eececcssenecepes

Rectangle on stack

Something else that’s important to many QuickDraw calls, including EraseRect, is

the current GrafPort. EraseRect erases the specified rectangle in the current GrafPort,
so we should check the current GrafPort. Since the program should be updating the
window that was just uncovered, Window 1, it should be the current GrafPort.
We can check the value of the current port in the global called thePort; you might
remember from Chapter 6 that register A5 contains the address of a pointer to thePort.

By using a Dump window, we get the value of thePort. To see which window this
indicates, we can use the DM command. The result of this is shown in Figure 7-20.

Displaying WindowRecord at

002BCC74

~002BCC84

portRect

#0 #0 #133 #200

002BCC8C

visRgn

002BBC78 -> 002BD130 ->

002BCC90

- 002BCCEO

clipRgn

002BBC74 -> 002BD234 —->

windowKind

|

0008

;

002BCCE2

visible

002BCCE3

hilited

002BCCE4
QOO02BCCES5

goAwayFlag._
spareFlag

TRUE
_ FALSE

002BCCE6

strucRgn

- 002BBC70 —> 002BD900 —>

002BCCEA

contRgn

002BBC6C ~—>002BD7BC ->

002BCCEE

updateRgn

0O02BBC68 -—> 002BD7D0 ->

002BCCF2

windowDefProc

0400B584

->

6009A160 ->

0O02BCCF6

dataHandle

OO2BBC5C

->

002BD948

—->

OO2BCCFA

titleHandle

0O2BBC64

->

002BD934

-> Window2

002BCCFE

titleWidth

0040

002BCD00

controlList

NIL

— 002BCD04

nextWindow

OO2BCBDO

windowPic

NIL

refCon

002BBC60

_. 002BCD08

~ 002BCDOC

Figure 7-20.

TRUE

.

Window display

TRUE

ee

->

|

Chapter7

Shortcut.

Real Live Debugging

You can see the window that thePort points to by entering

DM@G@RAS.

The interesting field here is titleHandle. It says that the current port is Window
2, not Window 1 as we had expected. This means that the EraseRect that is about to
happen will erase Window 2's port rectangle! That's our bug!

Let's analyze what's going wrong here. We’re in the update event-handling
code. What we want to do here is erase the port rectangle of the window that’s
being updated. Looking at the source code, we had the right idea by calling EraseRect (WindowPtr (myEvent.message)’.portRect). That’s the right rectangle, since
myEvent.message contains a pointer to the window that needs to be updated. But

for EraseRect to work, we have to set thePort to point at this window. Also, it would
be nice if the setting of thePort at the beginning of the update event-handling code
were restored at the end, so that any other drawing code in the application isn’t
confused; this is a standard good practice, called preserving the port.
What we'll do is add to the beginning of the update event-handling code a
GetPort call, which will save the current port, followed by a SetPort (myEvent.mes-

sage), which will set the port to the window that needs updating. At the end of the
code, we'll add a SetPort call, which sets the port back to the one preserved at the
start of the code. This should fix our “erasing the wrong window” bug.

Crime fighter’s notebook.

Watch out for bugs like this, where drawing (or

erasing) happens in an unexpected place. This is often a sign that thePort is
incorrectly set, and this is a pretty common error.

Looking for more bugs
We've now found all the bugs that we’d discovered previously (hooray for us), so
it seems like this is a pretty good time to rebuild the application. Then we'll run it

again to make sure we fixed the bugs we thought we fixed and see if we can find
any more.

The new, fixed version of the program is shown in Listing 7-2. Let’s run it and

see if the bugs have really been fixed. As the program starts up, we see a good sign:
Window 1 now has a blinking insertion point, which says that adding TEActivate

221

222,

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

seems to have worked (you should always think in nonabsolute, vaguely negative
terms like this when dealing with debugging—you never know when the computer might be reading your mind).

Listing 7-2.p.
program Showoff;

{

listing

7-2.p

}

uses

Memtypes,

Quickdraw,

OSIntf,

TooliIntf,

PackIntf;

const

appleID =

128;

fileID

=

129;

editID

=

130;

appleM =

1;

fileM

=

2;

editM

=

3;

menuCount

{resource IDs/menu

{index

for each menu

3;

{total

number

aboutItem =

1;

{item

in Apple

{Items

=

1;

cutItem

=

3;

copyitem

=

4;

pasteItem

=

5;

for Apple,

in myMenus

=

undoItem

IDs

File and Edit menus}

(array of menu

handles)
}

of menus}
menu}

in Edit menu}

clearitem = 6;
newltem =

1;

closeItem =

quitiItem =
wName

=

{items

5;

‘Window

windDX =

25;

windDY =

25;

leftEdge
topEdge

=
=

';

10;

{prefix

for window names}

{distance

to move

for

{initial

dimensions

new windows}

of window}

42;

rightEdge

= 210;

botEdge

175;

=

in File menu}

3;

var

myMenus:

array

dragRect:
txRect:

textH:

[1..menuCount]

Rect;

Rect;

TEHandle;

theChar:
extended:

char;
boolean;

OF MenuHandle;

{handles

to

the menus}

{rectangle used to mark boundaries
{rectangle

for

{handle

Textedit record}

to

text

in

{typed character}
{true

if

user

is

for dragging window}

application window}

Shift-clicking}

Chapter7

Real Live Debugging

Listing
doneFlag:

if user has

chosen Quit

EventRecord;

{information about

wRecord:

WindowRecord;

{information about the

myWindow:

WindowPtr;

{pointer to wRecord}

myWinPeek

:

{another pointer to wRecord}

WindowPeek;

whichWindow:
nextWRect:

nextWNum:

Item}

application window}

for next window to be

pressed}

opened}

{title of next window to be opened}

Str255;

{number of next window

GrafPtr;

(for title)}

{pointer to preserve GrafPort}

{for disabling menu

boolean;

scrapErr:

items}

Longint;

scrCopyErr:

procedure

{portRect

continued

an event}

{window in which mouse button was

Longint;

savedPort:
menusOK:

WindowPtr;

Rect;

nextWTitle:

{

{true

boolean;

myEvent:

7-2.p.

223

Integer;

SetUpMenus;

set up menus

and menu

bar

}

var

i:

Integer;

begin
myMenus[appleM]

:= GetMenu(appleID);

{read Apple menu}

AddResMenu(myMenus[appleM],
’DRVR’ );

{add

myMenus[fileM]

:= GetMenu(fileID);

{read File menu

}

myMenus[editM]

:= GetMenu(editID);

{read Edit menu

}

for

i:=l1

names}

to menuCount do
{install menus

InsertMenu(myMenus[{i],0);

DrawMenuBar;
end;

desk accessory

{

in menu

bar

}

and draw menu bar}

{SetUpMenus
}

procedure OpenWindow;

{

Open a new window

}

begin

NumToString

nextWTitle
myWindow

(nextWNum,

:= concat

:= NewWindow

Pointer

(-1l1), True,
(myWindow);

SetPort

txRect

(Nil,

0);

{prepare number

nextWTitle);
nextWRect,

nextWTitle,
{open the window}
{make

it the

for title}

{add to prefix}
True,

noGrowDocProc,

current port}

:= thePort’.portRect;{prepare TERecord for new window}

InsetRect
textH

nextWTitle);

(wName,

:=

(txRect,
TENew

myWinPeek

4,

0);

(txRect,

:= WindowPeek

txRect);

(myWindow)
;

myWinPeek’.refcon := Longint

(textH);

{keep TEHandle

in refcon!}

OffsetRect (nextWRect, windDX, windDY);{move window down and right}
{move back if it’s too far over}
if nextWRect.right > dragRect.right
then OffsetRect

if

(nextWRect,

nextWRect.bottom >
then

OffsetRect

nextWNum

menusOK

:=

:=

(nextWRect,

nextWNum +

false;

-nextWRect.left

+

leftEdge,

dragRect.bottom
1;

0,

-nextWRect.top +

{bump number

for

0);

topEdge)
;

next window}

224

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Listing
EnableItem
end;

(myMenus

[editM],0);

{in

case this

is

the

7-2.p.

continued

only window}

{OpenWindow}

procedure KillWindow

{Close

a window and

(theWindow:

WindowPtr);

throw everything away}

begin

TEDispose

(TEHandle

(WindowPeek

(theWindow)*.refcon)
);

{throw away TERecord}

DisposeWindow
textH

if

:=

(theWindow);

{throw away WindowRecord}

NIL;

{for

FrontWindow = NIL

{if

then

DisableItem

if WindowPeek

then EnableItem

end;

in main

(myMenus[fileM],

loop}

disable Close}

0

a desk acc

(myMenus[editM],

DisableItem

event

closeItem);

(FrontWindow)*.windowKind <
{if

else

TEIdle

no more windows,

is

coming up,

enable

undo}

undoItem)

(myMenus[editM],

undoItem);

{KillWindow}

function MyFilter
var

itemHit:

(theDialog:
Integer):

DialogPtr;

var theEvent:

EventRecord:

Boolean;

var

theType:

Integer;

theItem:

Handle;

theBox:

Rect;

finalTicks:

Longint;

begin

if

(BitAnd(theEvent.message,charCodeMask)

=
(BitAnd(theEvent.message,charCodeMask)

or

then

13)
=

{carriage

3)

{enter}

begin
GetDItem

(theDialog,

HiliteControl
Delay

(8,

:=

MyFilter

end
else
end;

{if

{function

procedure

theItem,

theBox);

(theItem),

1);

(ControlHandle

(theItem),

0);

1;

:=

True;

BitAnd...then

MyFilter

theType,

finalTicks);

HiliteControl

itemHit

1,

(ControlHandle

:=

begin}

False;

MyFilter}

DoAboutBox;

var

itemHit:

Integer;

begin

myWindow
repeat

Nae

:= GetNewDialog

(1000,

@MyFilter, pointer

(-1));

return}

_,

Chapter7

Listing 7-2.p.
ModalDialog

until

DisposDialog
end;

(Nil,

itemHit =

229

Real Live Debugging

continued

itemHit)

1;

(myWindow)
;

{procedure DoAboutBox}

procedure DoCommand

{Execute

(mResult:

LONGINT);

Item specified by mResult,

the

result of MenuSelect}

var

theItem:

Integer;

{menu

item number

theMenu:

Integer;

{menu

number

{desk

accessory

name:

Str255;

temp:

Integer;

from mResult

from mResult

low-order word}

high-order word}

name}

begin
theItem

:= LoWord(mResult);

theMenu

:=

{call

HiWord(mResult)
;

case theMenu

of

{
{case

Toolbox Utility

menu

item number

on menu

routines to set}
and menu number}

ID}

appleID:

if theItem = aboutItem
then DoAboutBox
else

begin
GetItem(myMenus[(appleM],theItem,name);

{GetPort

(savedPort)
;}

ScrapErr

:=

scrCopyErr

temp

:=

TEToScrap;

OpenDeskAcc (name);

EnableItem

{SetPort

if

ZeroScrap;

:=

(myMenus

[editM],0);

(savedPort)
;}

FrontWindow <> NIL
then

begin
EnableItem

(myMenus

[fileM],

closeItem);

EnableItem

(myMenus

[(editM],

undoItem);

end;
menusOK

end;

{if

{if
:=

FrontWindow then begin}

false;

theItem...else

begin}

fileID:
case

thelItem of

newItem:

OpenWindow;
closeItem:

if WindowPeek

(FrontWindow)”*.windowKind < 0

then CloseDeskAcc

(windowPeek

{if desk acc window,
else KillWindow

{if

(FrontWindow)~*.windowKind)

close it}

(FrontWindow)
;

it’s one of mine,

blow it

away}

226

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

4

Listing 7-2.p.
quitItem:
doneFlag
end;

{case

:=

TRUE;

{quit}

theItem}

editID:
begin
if

not

SystemEdit(theItem-1)

then

case theItem of

{case on menu item number}

cutitem:

TECut(textH);

{call TextEdit to handle

copylItem:
TECopy (textH);
pastelItem:
TEPaste(textH);

clearItem:

TEDelete(textH);
end;

end;

{case

theItem}

{editID begin}

end;

{case

theMenu}

HiliteMenu(0);
end;

{DoCommand}

procedure FixCursor;
var

mouseLoc:

point;

begin
GetMouse

(mouseLoc);

if PtInRect

(mouseLoc,

thePort”.portRect)

then SetCursor (GetCursor (iBeamCursor)~*)
else

end;

SetCursor

{procedure

begin

(arrow);

FixCursor}

{main

program}

InitGraf(@thePort)
;
InitFonts;
FlushEvents(everyEvent,0);
InitWindows;

InitMenus;
TEInit;

InitDialogs(NIL);
InitCursor;

Item}

continued

>

Chapter7

Real Live Debugging

22/7

~

Listing 7-2.p.

continued

SetUpMenus;

with

screenBits.bounds

do

SetRect(dragRect,4,24,right-4,bottom-4);
doneFlag
menusOK

:=

nextWNum

:=

:=

false;

false;

1;

{initialize window number}

SetRect

(nextWRect, leftEdge,topEdge,rightEdge,botEdge)
;
{initialize window rectangle}
OpenWindow;
{start with one open window}
Main event

loop

}

repeat

SystemTask;

if FrontWindow <> NIL
then

if WindowPeek (FrontWindow)”.windowKind >= 0
then FixCursor;

if

not menusOK and

(FrontWindow = NIL)

then

begin
DisableItem

(myMenus

[fileM],

closeItem);

DisableItem

(myMenus

[editM],

0);

menusOK

end;
if

textH

:=

true;

{if FrontWindow...then begin}
<>

Nil

then TEIdle(textH);

if

GetNextEvent (everyEvent ,myEvent )
then

case myEvent.what

of

mouseDown:

case FindWindow(myEvent.where,whichWindow) of
inSysWindow:

SystemClick(myEvent ,whichWindow) ;
inMenuBar:
DoCommand (MenuSelect (myEvent.where) );
inDrag:
DragWindow(whichWindow,myEvent.where,dragRect)
;

inContent:
begin

if whichWindow <>

FrontWindow
then SelectWindow(whichWindow)
else

begin

GlobalToLocal(myEvent.where)
;

extended

:= BitAnd(myEvent.modifiers,shiftKey)

TEClick(myEvent.where,extended,textH)
;

<>

0;

228

PART

TWO

DEBUGGING

~\

Listing
end;
end;

7-2.p.

continued

{else}

{inContent}

inGoAway:
if

TrackGoAway

(whichWindow,

then KillWindow
end;

{case

keyDown,

autoKey:

myEvent.where)

(whichWindow)
;

FindWindow}

begin
theChar

if

:=

CHR(BitAnd(myEvent.message,charCodeMask)
);

BitAnd(myEvent.modifiers,cmdKey)
then

DoCommand(MenukKey(theChar)
)

else

TEKey(theChar,textH);

end;

{keyDown,

<>

0

autoKey begin}

activateEvt:
begin
if

BitAnd(myEvent.modifiers,activeFlag)
then

{application window

is

becoming

<>

0

active}

begin
SetPort

textH

(GrafPtr

(myEvent.message)
);

:= TEHandle

(WindowPeek

(myEvent.message)”~.refcon);

TEActivate(textH);

EnableItem

(myMenus[fileM],closeItem)
;

DisableItem(myMenus[editM],undoItem);

if WindowPeek (FrontWindow)”~.nextWindow .windowKind < 0
end

else

then

scrCopyErr

{if

BitAnd...then

:=

TEFromScrap;

begin}

{application window is

becoming

inactive}

begin

TEDeactivate(TEHandle(WindowPeek(myEvent.message)”~.refcon)
);
if WindowPeek (FrontWindow)*.windowKind < 0
then

begin

EnableItem
scrapErr

scrCopyErr

end
else
end;
end;

(myMenus[editM],

:=

undoItem);

Zeroscrap;

:=

TEToScrap;

{if WindowPeek...then begin}
DisableItem

(myMenus[editM],

undolItem);

{else begin}

{activateEvt

begin}

updateEvt:
begin
GetPort

(savedPort);

SetPort

(GrafPtr

(myEvent.message)
);

BeginUpdate(WindowPtr(myEvent.message)
);

EraseRect (WindowPtr(myEvent.message)*.portRect);

TEUpdate (WindowPtr(myEvent.message)”.portRect,

TEHandle(WindowPeek(myEvent.message)”~.refcon)
);
EndUpdate(WindowPtr(myEvent.message)
);

Chapter7

Real Live Debugging

Listing 7-2.p.
SetPort

end;
end;

(savedPort);

{updateEvt begin}

{case myEvent.what}

until doneFlag;
end.

Listing 7-2.r.

/*

listing 7-2.r */

#include

Types.r

resource

‘MENU’

(128)

{

128,
textMenuProc,

Ox7FFFFFFD,

enabled,

apple,
{

About Showoff...,

noIcon,

noKey,

-,

noMark,

plain

noIcon,

noKey,

3
resource

‘MENU’

(129)

{

129,
textMenuProc,

Ox7FFFFFF7,
enabled,

File,

{

New, noIcon, N, noMark, plain,
Open, noIcon, O, noMark, plain,
Close, noIcon, W, noMark, plain,
-, noIcon, noKey, noMark, plain,
Quit,

noIcon,

Q,

noMark,

plain

‘3
resource

‘MENU’

(130)

{

130,
textMenuProc,

Ox7FFFFFFC,
enabled,

Edit,

{

Undo, noIcon, Z, noMark, plain,
-, noIcon, noKey, noMark, plain,
Cut, noIcon, X, noMark, plain,
Copy, noiIcon, C, noMark, plain,
Paste, nolIcon, V, noMark, plain,

noMark,

plain,

229

continued

230

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

~

Listing

Clear, noIcon,

noKey,

noMark,

7-2.r. continued

plain

3
resource

{

‘'DITL’

(1000,

About

/* array DITLarray:
/* [1] */
{61,

191,

Button

81,

box)

{

2 elements

*/

251},

{

enabled,
OK

},

/*

[2]

{8,

*/

24,

56,

272},

StaticText {
disabled,

Example program\nby Scott Knaster
\nversion 3.0
12/12/91

};
resource

{62,

‘DLOG’

100,

(1000,

148,

About

box)

{

412},

dBoxProc,

visible,
goAway,

0x0,

1000,

New Dialog

};

SJ
Next we'll try opening another window, typing text into the two windows, and
then dragging them on top of each other and away from each other. This is working
OK, too, so it looks like our SetPort fix in the update event-handler was the right
thing to do.

Now we're ready for the big one: closing a window. If you remember, there
were two problems here: two windows were getting disposed of, and we were
getting a bus error when the program called TEIdle with a Nil handle.

When we close a window now, everything seems to be working fine. The
window we close goes away, and the window behind it becomes the new frontmost
window. Only one window is being closed, and no bus errors in sight. Success!
All the bugs we found seem to be fixed. We should now spend a few minutes
exercising the application to see if we can find anything else wrong. In fact, just to
give you something to do, I've left a really vicious bug in the program for you to

seek and destroy. All Ill tell you about this bug is that it causes a system error, is
easily accessible and reproducible, and should be found if you’re careful to try out

Chapter7

Real Live Debugging

231

all the program’s features (and there aren’t that many features to try). If you want
another clue, here’s how to make the problem appear (use your debugger to
translate hex into ASCII):
S4F

70

65

6E

20

41

62

6F

75

74

20

42

6F

78

20

74

77

69

63

65

Isn’t this fun?

Know what you're doing.

One unfortunate symptom of sloppy program-

ming is the magical bug fix. That is, you’ve got a problem somewhere in your
program and you know that if you insert some blessed line of code some-

where the problem goes away. You don’t fully understand what the problem

is, you don’t know why the magical line of code fixes it, but you’re happy,
since it’s one less bug for you to worry about. Don’t fall into this trap! If you're

in this situation, you’re dooming yourself in two ways. First, you’ve added
code to your program that you don’t really understand. Second, and more
important, you probably haven't fixed the bug. If a magical line of code seems
to make the problem go away and you don’t understand why, it'll probably
come back later and bite you (or your customers). What do you do then?
Debugging and understanding what your code really does is the key to

avoiding this situation. Obviously, if you really know what your code is
doing, you can figure out what it takes to fix it. Understand that magical bug
fix code is like a secret incantation: it seems to work, but you don’t know why.

It’s important to realize that not all short pieces of code that fix problems
are bad. Frequently, a bug will be fixed by a single instruction or parameter

change. That's great—just be sure you know what the problem was and why
the fix works, or you can bet that you'll get it in the end.

Optimizing with the debugger
Once you get rid of a program's bugs, you can use a debugger to help you optimize
the program; that is, make it run faster and smarter by eliminating waste and doing
a better job of memory management. There are two basic categories of problems:

bad practices in code and bad management of data. If you’re using a compiler, there
are some things you can do to get better code, but, in general, you pretty much have
to live with what the compiler generates. If it’s a fairly smart compiler, this isn’t so

bad. You can always write the most crucial pieces of the application in assembly
language and link them as external routines, if you're into that.
Management of your data, on the other hand, is up to you. To demonstrate
some of the atrocities that people inflict on their data, we can use a debugger to
examine the application heap zone while we runa

program. The program we'll use

pe

232

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

is a version of the onewe’ve been using in this chapter that’s been slightly modified

to be atrocious. It’s shown in Listing 7-3.

(—

>

Listing

7-3.p.

program Showoff;

{

listing

7-3.p

}

uses

Memtypes,

Quickdraw,

OSIntf,

ToolIntf,

PackIntf;

const

appleID

=

128;

fileID

=

129;

editID

=

130;

appleM =

1;

fileM

=

2;

editM

=

3;

menuCount

{resource

{index

for

IDs/menu

each menu

IDs

for Apple,

in myMenus

=

3;

{total

aboutItem =

1;

{item in Apple menu}
{Items

undoItem

=

1;

cutitem

=

3;

copyItem

=

4;

pasteItem

=

5;

clearitem =

6;

newltem =

1;

closeItem =

quitItem =
wName

=

{items

windDX =

25;

25;
=
=

';

(array of menu

handles)
}

menus}

Edit menu}

File menu}

10;

{prefix

for window names}

{distance

to move

for

{initial

dimensions

new windows}

of window}

42;

rightEdge

= 210;

botEdge

175;

=

in

Edit menus}

5;

windDY =
leftEdge

in

of

and

3;

‘Window

topEdge

number

File

var

MyMenus:

array

dragRect:
txRect:

textH:

[1..menuCount]

Rect;

Rect;

TEHandle;

theChar:

char;

OF

MenuHandle;

{rectangle used

{handles

{rectangle

for

{handle

Textedit record}

{typed

to

to

the

to mark boundaries
text

in

application

menus}

for

dragging window}

window}

character}

extended:

boolean;

{true

doneFlag:

boolean;

{true if user has chosen Quit Item}

if

user

is

Shift-clicking}

J

Chapter7

233

Real Live Debugging

~

Listing 7-3.p.
myEvent:

EventRecord;

{information

about

an

wRecord:

WindowRecord;

{information

about

the

myWindow:

WindowPtr;

{pointer

myWinPeek

:

{another pointer to wRecord}

WindowPeek;

whichWindow:
nextWRect:

menusOK:

Str255;

Longint;

savedPort:

GrafPtr;

{$S

{title

next window to be

of
of

{pointer

next

window to

next window

to

preserve

{for disabling menu

(for

be

pressed}

opened}

opened}
title)}

GrafPort}
items}

Integer;

Handle;

InitSeg}

procedure

{

for

Longint;

scrCopyErr:

dummy:

application window}

to wRecord}

{portRect

{number

boolean;

scrapErr:

event}

{window in which mouse button was

Rect;

nextWTitle:
nextWNum:

WindowPtr;

continued

SetUpMenus;

set up menus

and menu

bar

}

var

i:

Integer;

begin
myMenus[appleM]

:=

GetMenu(appleID);

{read Apple menu}

AddResMenu(myMenus[appleM],'DRVR’);

{add desk

myMenus[fileM]

:=

GetMenu(fileID);

{read File menu

}

myMenus[editM]

:= GetMenu(editID);

{read Edit menu

}

for

i:=1

names}

to menuCount do

InsertMenu(myMenus[i],0);
DrawMenuBar;

end;

accessory

{and

{install menus

draw menu

in menu

bar

}

{prepare number

for

title}

bar}

{SetUpMenus}

{$S Main}
procedure OpenWindow;
{

Open

a

new window

}

begin
NumToString

nextWTitle

myWindow
SetPort

concat

(-1),

nextWTitle);

(wName,

:= NewWindow

Pointer

txRect

(nextWNum,

:=

True,

nextWTitle);

(Nil,

nextWRect,

0);

{open the window}

(myWindow);

{make

nextWTitle,

it the

True,

noGrowDocProc,

current port}

:= thePort’.portRect;{prepare TERecord for new window}

InsetRect

(txRect,

textH

:=

Hlock

(Handle

TENew

myWinPeek

4,

0);

(txRect,

txRect);

(textH));

:= WindowPeek

(myWindow)
;

myWinPeek”*.refcon := Longint
OffsetRect
if

{add to prefix}

(nextWRect,

nextWRect.right
then OffsetRect

>

(textH);

windDX,

dragRect.right

(nextWRect,

{keep TEHandle in refcon!}

windDY);{move window down
{move back if

-nextWRect.left

+

and right}

it’s

too

leftEdge,

0);

far

over}

234

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Listing 7-3.p.

if

nextWRect.bottom >
then OffsetRect

nextwWNum
menusOK

:=

EnableItem
end;

{$S

1;

0,

-nextWRect.top +

{bump number

topEdge)
;

for next window}

false;

(myMenus

[editM],0);

{in case this

is

the only window}

{OpenWindow}

InitSeg}

procedure
{

dragRect.bottom

(nextWRect,

:= nextWNum +

continued

Initialize;

One-time

set up of

everything

}

begin
InitGraf(@thePort);

InitFonts;
FlushEvents(everyEvent,0);

InitWindows;
InitMenus;
TEInit;

InitDialogs(NIL);

InitCursor;
dummy

:=

NewHandle

(4000000);

SetUpMenus;

with

screenBits.bounds

do

SetRect (dragRect,4,24,right-4,bottom-4);
doneFlag
menusOK

nextWNum

SetRect

:=

:=

:=

false;

false;

1;

{initialize window number}

(nextWRect, leftEdge, topEdge, rightEdge, botEdge) ;

{initialize window rectangle}
{start with one open window}

OpenWindow;
end;

{$S

{procedure

Initialize}

Killseg}

procedure KillWindow
{Close

(theWindow:

WindowPtr)
;

a window and throw everything away}

begin

TEDispose (TEHandle

(WindowPeek (theWindow)”*.refcon)
);
{throw away TERecord}

DisposeWindow

(theWindow);

textH := NIL;
if FrontWindow = NIL
then DisableItem

if WindowPeek

{throw away WindowRecord}

{for TEIdle in main event loop}
{if no more windows, disable Close}

(myMenus[fileM],
{if

then EnableItem

else DisableItem
end;

Ne

closeItem);

(FrontWindow)”*.windowKind < 0

{KillWindow}

a desk acc

(myMenus[editM],

(myMenus[editM],

is

undoItem)

undoItem);

coming up,

enable

undo}

Chapter7

235

Real Live Debugging

TM\

Listing 7-3.p.

continued

{$S Main}

function MyFilter
var

itemHit:

(theDialog:
Integer):

DialogPtr;

var theEvent:

EventRecord;

Boolean;

var

theType:

Integer;

theItem:

Handle;

theBox:

Rect;

finalTicks:

Longint;

begin

if

(BitAnd(theEvent.message,charCodeMask)

= 13) {carriage
(BitAnd(theEvent.message,charCodeMask) = 3) {enter}
then

or

return}

begin
GetDItem

(theDialog,

HiliteControl
Delay

(8,

:=

MyFilter
end

{if

theItem,

theBox);

(theItem),

1);

(ControlHandle

(theItem),

0);

1;

:= True;

BitAnd...then begin}

else MyFilter
end;

theType,

finalTicks);

HiliteControl
itemHit

1,

(ControlHandle

:= False;

{function MyFilter}

{$S Main}
procedure DoAboutBox;
var

itemHit:

Integer;

begin
myWindow

:= GetNewDialog

(1000,

Nil,

pointer

(-1));

repeat

ModalDialog

until

DisposDialog
end;
{$S

(@MyFilter, itemHit)

itemHit =

1;

(myWindow);

{procedure DoAboutBox}

Main}

procedure

{Execute

DoCommand

Item

(mResult:

specified

LONGINT);

by mResult,

the

result

of

MenuSelect}

var

theItem:

Integer;

{menu

item number

theMenu:

Integer;

{menu

number

{desk

accessory

name:

Str255;

temp:

Integer;

from mResult

from mResult

low-order word}

high-order word}

name}

begin
theItem

:=

LoWord(mResult);

{call

theMenu

:=

HiWord(mResult);

{

Toolbox Utility

menu

item number

routines

and menu

to

set

}

number}

236

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Listing 7-3.p.
case

theMenu

of

{case

on menu

ID}

appleID:

if

theItem = aboutItem
then

DoAboutBox

else

begin
GetItem(myMenus[appleM],theItem,name)
;

{GetPort

(savedPort
) ;}

scrapErr

:=

scrCopyErr

temp

:=

ZeroScrap;

:=

TEToScrap;

OpenDeskAcc (name);

EnableItem
{SetPort

(myMenus

[editM],0);

(savedPort);}

if FrontWindow <>
then

NIL

begin
EnableItem

(myMenus

[fileM],

EnableItem

(myMenus

[editM],

end;
menusOK

end;

{if

{if
:=

closeItem);

undoItem);
FrontWindow then begin}

false;

theItem...else

begin}

fileID:
case

theItem of

newlItem:

OpenWindow;
closeItem:

if WindowPeek

(FrontWindow)”*.windowKind <

then CloseDeskAcc

(windowPeek

{if desk acc window,
else

{if

KillWindow

it’s

close

0

(FrontWindow) *.windowKind)

it}

(FrontWindow)
;

one of mine,

blow it

away}

quitiItem:
doneFlag
end;

{case

:=

TRUE;

{quit}

theItem}

editID:
begin

if

not

SystemEdit(theItem-1)

then
case

theItem

of

{case

on

menu

item

number}

cutItem:

TECut(textH);
copyItem:

TECopy (textH) ;

{call

TextEdit to

handle

Item}

continued

Chapter 7

Listing 7-3.p.
pasteItem:
TEPaste(textH);

clearItem:
TEDelete(textH);

end;

end;
end;

{case

theItem}

{editID begin}
{case

theMenu}

HiliteMenu(0);
end;

{DoCommand}

{$S Main}
procedure FixCursor;
var

mouseLoc:

point;

begin
GetMouse

(mouseLoc);

if PtInRect (mouseLoc,

thePort”.portRect)

then SetCursor (GetCursor (iBeamCursor)””*)
else

SetCursor

(arrow);

end;

{procedure FixCursor}

begin

{main program}

Initialize;
{

Main

event

loop

}

repeat

SystemTask;

if

FrontWindow <> NIL
then

if WindowPeek (FrontWindow)”*.windowKind >= 0
then FixCursor;

if

not menusOK and

(FrontWindow = NIL)

then

begin
DisableItem

(myMenus

[fileM],

closeItem);

DisableItem

(myMenus

[editM],

0);

menusOK

end;
if

textH

:=

true;

{if FrontWindow...then begin}
<>

Nil

then TEIdle(textH);

if GetNextEvent(everyEvent
,myEvent )
then

case myEvent.what of
mouseDown:

case FindWindow(myEvent.where,whichWindow)

237

Real Live Debugging

of

continued

238

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

a

Listing 7-3.p.

continued

inSysWindow:
SystemClick(m
, whichWindow)
yEvent
;

inMenuBar:
DoCommand (MenuSelect (myEvent.where) );

inDrag:
DragWindow(whichWindow,myEvent.where,dragRect);

inContent:
begin
if whichWindow <>
then

FrontWindow

SelectWindow(whichWindow)

else

begin
GlobalToLocal(myEvent.where)
;
extended

:= BitAnd(myEvent.modifiers,shiftKey)
TECLick(myEvent.wh
extended, textH)
ere,
;
end;

end;

<>

{else}

{inContent}

inGoAway:

if TrackGoAway

(whichWindow,

then KillWindow

end;

{case

keyDown,

autoKey:

myEvent.where)

(whichWindow)
;

FindWindow}

begin

theChar := CHR(BitAnd(myEvent .message, charCodeMask) );
if BitAnd(myEvent.modifiers,cmdKey) <> 0
then DoCommand(MenuKey(theChar)
)

else TEKey(theChar,textH);
end;

{keyDown,

autoKey begin}

activateEvt:
begin

if

BitAnd(myEvent.modifiers,activeFlag)

then

{application window is
begin
SetPort

(GrafPtr

textH

TEHandle

:=

0

(myEvent.message)
);

TEActivate(textH);
EnableItem

<>

becoming active}

(WindowPeek

(myEvent.message)”~.refcon) ;

(myMenus([fileM],closeItem)
;

DisableItem(myMenus[editM],undoItem)
;

if WindowPeek
then

(FrontWindow)*.nextWindow’.windowKind <

scrCopyErr

:= TEFromScrap;

0

end

{if BitAnd...then begin}
{application window is becoming
begin

else

inactive}

TEDeactivate (TEHandle(WindowPeek(myEvent .message)*.refcon) );
if WindowPeek (FrontWindow)”~.windowKind < 0
then

0;

Chapter7

Real Live Debugging

239

~

Listing 7-3.p.

begin
EnableItem
scrapErr

scrCopyErr

end

(myMenus[editM],

:=

:=

end;

TEToScrap;

{if WindowPeek...then begin}

else DisableItem
end;

undoItem);

ZeroScrap;

(myMenus[editM],

undolItem);

{else begin}

{activateEvt begin}

updateEvt:

begin
GetPort

(savedPort);

SetPort

(GrafPtr

(myEvent.message)
);

BeginUpdate(WindowPtr(myEvent.message)
);

EraseRect (WindowPtr(myEvent .message)~.portRect);
TEUpdate (WindowPtr(myEvent.message)*~.portRect,
TEHandle(WindowPeek(myEvent.message)”.refcon)
);
EndUpdate(WindowPtr(myEvent.message)
);
SetPort

end;
end;

UnloadSeg

(savedPort);

{updateEvt begin}

{case myEvent.what}

(@Initialize);

until doneFlag;
end.

Listing 7-3.r

/* listing 7-3.r */
#include

Types.r

resource

‘MENU’

(128)

{

128,
textMenuProc,

Ox7FFFFFFD,

enabled,

apple,
About Showoff...,
-, noIcon, noKey,

};
resource

‘MENU’

(129)

129,
textMenuProc,

Ox7FFFFFF7,

enabled,

File,

{

noIcon,
noMark,

noKey,
plain

noMark,

plain,

continued

240

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Listing

{

New,

nolIcon,

Open,

Close,
-,

noMark,

O,

noIcon,

noIcon,

Quit,

}}

N,

noIcon,

plain,

noMark,

plain,

W,

noMark,

plain,

noKey,

noMark,

plain,

noIcon,

Q,

noMark,

plain

}

resource

‘MENU’

(130)

{

130,
textMenuProc,

Ox7FFFFFFC,
enabled,

Edit,

{

Undo,

-,

noIcon,

noIcon,

Cut,

noIcon,

Copy,

Z,

C,

noIcon,

V,

Clear, noIcon,

plain,

noMark,

X,

noIcon,

Paste,

noMark,

noKey,

plain,

noMark,

plain,

noMark,

plain,

noMark,

noKey,

plain,

noMark,

plain

};
resource

{

/*

‘DITL’

(1000,

About

array DITLarray:
/* [1] */
{61,

191,

Button

81,

box)

{

2 elements

*/

251},

{

enabled,
OK

},

/*

[2]

{8,

24,

*/
56,

272},

StaticText {
disabled,

Example program\nby Scott Knaster

\nversion 3.0

12/12/91

‘3
resource

{62,

‘DLOG’

100,

adBoxProc,

visible,
goAway,

0x0,
1000,

New Dialog

(1000,

148,

About

412},

box)

{

7-3.r. continued

Chapter7

Real Live Debugging

241

We'll run this program, open a few windows, type some stuff, open the “about

box,” close some windows, and then interrupt it and go into the debugger to spy on
it. We press the interrupt button to get into the debugger. The main thing we’re
interested in here is the application heap zone, which is shown in Figure 7-21.

n
io7578
at 0044
heapat
Applic
| PisplayinthegLeng
Prg Type ID _ File
Lock
Ptr
Mstr
Tag
th =
Start
00447EB4 00000100+00

© 00447FBC 00000A92+02
e 00448A58 00000004+00

© 0044864 COD0009C+00

© 00448B08 0000009C+00

ao

Nn.

R
OO447FA8. iL
R . 00447F9C
L

es

N

00448BAcC 0000009C+00 F ©
©

00448C50

00000100+00

wN

¢ 00448D58 0000009C+00
00448DFc 0000006C+H00

NoF

00448F10 0000000A+02

R

00448D44

00448F24 0000002C+08

R

00448D40

00448F60 0000002c+00
00448F94 00000009+03

F
R

|
00448D34

00448E70 0000000A+02
00448E84 00000084+00

=

R 00448D48
=F
|

00448FA8

0000000C+00

F

00448FBC

00000010+00

R

00448D2C

00448FD4 0000003C+00

Fo

0044902C

0000000A+02

R 00448D38

¢ 00449040

00449018 0000000A+02

R

00448D3C
_

0000006A+02

R

004490B4 0000007C+00

=F

00449138 00000016+02
00449158 0000008C+00

R
F

.00447F24
_—

004491EC

0000000A+02

R

00447F8C

00449200

0000000A+02

R

00447F88

00449214

0000004c+00

=F

7

00449268 00000011+03

R

00447FA4

00449284 00000020+00

R

00447F98

004492AC 00000032+02

R

00447F84

004492E8

00000016+02

R

00447F80

00449308

0000001C+00

R 00447F7C

Figure 7-21.

Application heap display

00448D30

|

|

CODE

0001

0526

Name
Main

242

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

00447F78

0044932¢C

00000032+02

00449368

00000018+00

00447F74©

00449388

00000008+00

00447F70

00449398 00000002+02

00447F6C

004493A4

00000016+02

00447F68

004493c4

0000001C+00

00447F64

004493E8

00000032+02

00447F60

00000018+00

00447F5C

00449444 00000008+00
00449454 00000002+06

—00447F54

00449424

00447F58

00449464

000000F2+02

00447F90

00449560

0000010C+00

00447F94

00449674

00000016+02

00447F50

00449694

0000001C+00

00447F4C

004496B8

00000032+02

00447F48

004496F4

00000018+00

00447F44

00449714

00000008+00

00447F40

00449724

00000002+02

00447F3C

00449730

0000001A+02

00447F38

0044734

00449754

0000004c+00

004497A8

00000024+00

004497D4

00000000+04

00447F18

004497E0

0000000A+0A

00447F04

004497FC 0000001E+02

00447F20

00449824

L

P

CODE 0004

0526

InitSeg

P

CODE

0002

0526

$A5Init

0000000cC+00

00449838

000001EA+02

00447F14

MENU

0080

0526

00449A2C

0000003E+02

00447F0C

MENU 0081

0526

MENU

0526

00449A74

00000048+00

00447F08

00449AC4

0000002A+02

—00447F1C

00449AF8 0000000A+02

00447EF8

00449B0C

0000000A+02

00449820

00000010+00

00447EF4

00000008+00

00000004+00

00447F10

00449854

00000078+00

00447FB0

00449BD4

00000009+03

00447EF0

00449BE8

0000000C+00

Figure 7-21.

continued

AAM AAAAADANADADAAADADADAADAAABDADA

00449838
00449848

0082

Chapter7

00000010+00

00449¢14

0000003c+00

00449C58

0000002C+00

00449C8C

0000000A+02

00449CA0

0000000A+02

-00447BEC ©

wD

00449BFC

— 00447F30.
00447820

00449CB4. 00000034+00_
© 00449CF0 0000006A+0~A
00449D6C 00000004+00

- c0e47EEC

00000020+00

AMA

00449D78

243

Real Live Debugging

..00447EEO

R

00447FAC

00449DA0 00000034+00
00449DDc

00449DEC

00000005+03
0000005C+00

00449E50

00000163+01

00449FBC

0000000A+02

00449FD0. 0000009C+00

00447ED4..

R.

~~

0044A074 0000001C+00 ©
0044A098

0000006C+00

0044A10C

00000024+00

0044A138

00000074+00

0044A210

0000000C+00

0044A224

00000010+00

-00447F00 —

0044A1B4 oo000000c+HOO
0044A1C8 00000040+00

- 004a7EA0

i

0044A23C 0000052E+02
0000005c+00

© 0044A7D8

00000005+0B

00448D28

0044A7F0

00000020+00

00448D2

0044A818

00000034+00

0044A854

0000000C+00
0000002C+00

0044A89C

0001318C+00

® 0045DA30

00000062+02

a i

0044A868

L

i

0044A774

_00447EDC ~L P CODE 0003 0526

#101 blocks listed, which 1use #8906

There are #80600 free or purgeable bytes in thisheap
Figure 7-21.

continued

Killses

‘bytes, storing #88132‘bytes

244

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

The first thing to look for when you're examining a program’s heap for bad
things is fragmentation. This is when there are nonrelocatable blocks scattered
throughout the heap, as we discussed in the first part of this book (remember, so
long ago?). Just to remind you, this is bad because blocks in the heap consist of
consecutive bytes, and nonrelocatables reduce the number of consecutive free
bytes in the heap, effectively limiting the amount of available memory.
Fragmentation is easy to spot with a debugger. All you have to do is look down
the first column of the heap dump. The blocks that start with bullets are nonrelocatables and locked relocatables; they're the ones that can cause fragmentation.
The ideal heap zone will have all the bulleted items collected in two groups, one at
the beginning of the heap and one at the end (it’s also OK if they’re all at the
beginning). If all the bullets are together in these two places, there’s no fragmentation and the program is doing a great job.
The average program won't be quite this good. It’s likely to have a collection of

bullets at each end of the heap, with a few more scattered around in the middle.
This is a sign that the program’s memory management can be improved. Some

programs will have really awful fragmentation problems: they'll have bullets all
over the place. These programs are doomed to run out of memory before their time.

It’s the thought that counts. Remember that
it doesn’t matter how large the

nonrelocatable or locked relocatable blocks are. Even if they’re only 10 bytes,
they still do their damage by splitting the heap’s available free space.

Objects in the heap
What about our heap? It’s in pretty bad shape. Following the cluster of nonrelocatables that start the heap, there are quite a few asterisks that clutter up the heap.
Several of them are locked relocatable blocks. What are these things?
Let's take a look at one of them. There’s a dump of one of them in Figure 7-22.

Does it look familiar? Not really. If it’s one of the standard Macintosh data structures, we should be able to get some clues as to its identity by its size and its

contents. The heap dump tells us that it’s $72 (decimal 114) bytes long. Looking at

the first part of its contents, we see 00 00 00 04 00 85 00 C4. If we translate this into
decimal integers, we get 0 4 133 196, which you may recognize as the dimensions of
the rectangles that we passed to TENew. Could this be a TextEdit record?
TextEdit records always start out $68 bytes long (104 bytes decimal) and then
grow as more text is typed into the record. The first things in a TextEdit record, as
we can see by looking at its declaration, are the destination and view rectangles.
This memory block begins with two identical rectangles, and we called TENew

with identical rectangles in the program’s OpenWindow procedure. That confirms
it: this is a TextEdit record.

Chapter7

Displaying memory from 449cf0
00449CF0

-00449D00

00449D10

~.00449D20
00449D30
00449D40
00449D50

Figure 7-22.

0000 0004

0085

00C4

Real Live Debugging

oo
0000 0004 0085 00C4

cceecccccescccces

0010 0005 0020 0005: 0010 000C 0000 000C_

ceeee cecececece

0000 0000 0001 B6D3 0000 0000 0005 0044
7EE4 0044 7EEO-OOFF 0000: 0001 0000 0001

ececcececececseey
~eep~ecececcece

0005 0005 0000 0004

8C04 0004 A294 0000 cecececcecsceses

0000 0044 8B08 0000. 0000 0000 0000 0001 cecpeccccccccece
eccscece
0000 0005 0000 0000 0000 000C 0000 0000.

Locked heap block

Knowing the size and characteristics of various common Macintosh data

objects can help you identify them when you find them in the heap. Most objects
have recognizable patterns that hint at what type of object they are, like the two
rectangles that begin a TextEdit record. You can think of this pattern as a signature

for that type of object. Another big clue to an object's identity is its size. Figure 7-23
lists some common types and their signatures.

Figure 7-23.

Common data structures in the heap

Data structure

Hex size

Decimal size

Signature (first few bytes)

AlertTemplate

C

12

Rectangle, such as 00 64 00 74 01 12 01 20

BitMap

E

14

Address, such as 00 07 A7 00

ControlRecord

28 + title

40 + title

ControlHandle followed by WindowPtr

Cursor

44

68

Bits of cursor

*DialogRecord

AA

170

Window record

*GrafPort

6C

108

00 00 00 xF A7 00
(x is number of megabytes of RAM minus 1)
Macintosh II: 00 00 Fx x0 00 20

(each X is slot number of video card plus 8)
*Master Ptr Block

100

256

Addresses in heap (entire block)

Pattern

10

16

Patterned bytes, such as AA or 55

Print record

78

120

Small integer, such as 00 02

Region

A

10

00 0A followed by rectangle

TERecord

68**

104**

Two rectangles (record grows with more text)

*WindowRecord

9C

156

GrafPort

*Nonrelocatable object

**Object gets larger as more text is entered

245

246

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Why are these TextEdit records locked? They certainly don’t have to be locked;
this is an example of what happens when the programmer suffers from paranoia

about things in memory moving away. If you look in the OpenWindow procedure’s source, you'll see that the TextEdit record is locked right after it’s created and

stays locked forever. Obviously, the fix for this is simply not to lock the thing.
What are the other fragmenting objects in this heap? There’s a free ““hole”’

between two windows: it’s $9C bytes, exactly the size of a window record. This hole
was created because we just closed a window. Since the Memory Manager automatically forces nonrelocatable objects as low as possible when it allocates them,

the next window we open will fit into this hole. To prove it, we can exit the
debugger, open another window, and then return to the debugger. Sure enough,
the new window record fills the gap, as you can see by comparing Figure 7-24 with
the original heap in Figure 7-21 (note that the sixth block down has changed from
free to nonrelocatable). So this can’t really be called fragmentation; it’s just

anormal

occurrence for applications that allow any number of windows to be opened.
Now that we've identified the bulleted objects that are clogging up the heap,

let’s look at the ones that aren’t in the middle of things, just for fun. The first object
in the heap, as always, is a master pointer block. We know this because it’s always

the first object in a heap. Also, the fact that its size is $100 (decimal 256) bytes is a
dead giveaway. Some debuggers will include the size of the block header (8 bytes)
when reporting the total size of the block. This means that master pointer blocks
showa size of $108 bytes.

; Displaying the Application

y at 00447E78

fag Mstr Ptr Lock Prg

(00447EB4. 00000100100

wo

00447FBC 00000A92+02

N

00448A64 -0000009C+00

ww

00448A58 00000004400

0000009C+00°
(0000009Cc+00

Type

ID

File

Name

00447FA8
=oL
CODE
00447F9C L—
ee

0001

0526

Main

|

00448cs0° 00000100+00—
00448D58 -0000009C+00
00448DFCc. 0000000A+02

Figure 7-24.

aeAwms

a

a oron

or er er

Start
| Length

Start of application heap

00447EC4

oe

Chapter7

Real Live Debugging

Why ;a“duck? Yes, thefirst thing iin anapplication heap zone is always a

master pointer block, but why?The application heap zone is created when
the application starts up, when Launchis called. At this point, the heapis
completely empty. The first thing that goes in the heapis the application’s
CODE 0,when Launch calls GetResource. Since CODE 0, like all resources, is

a relocatable object, it needs.a master pointer,but there are no master pointers

in the application heap. So the Memory Manager automatically calls MoreMasters to create one.

Co

|

Z

The next object is identified by the debugger as'CODE 1, the main segment.
This is standard, too. The main segment is always loaded and always locked, as

we've discussed previously. The next 4 bytes contain a tiny block that holds the
application parameters handle, which is how the Finder passes along information

like the names of any documents that the user wants to open. You can verify this by
examining the value in the AppParmHandle global at location $AEC. Following it
are the three window records. All these objects have a legitimate right to be here.

There’s another locked object. It’s identified as CODE resource #2. A quick look
through our source code shows that we’ve never called UnloadSeg on this seg-

ment. If we don’t call UnloadSeg, it will remain loaded and locked until the end of

the universe, or until the application quits, whichever comes first. Oops! It’s taking
up memory. It should be unloaded so that it can be purged, if necessary. This is
easily fixed by puttingin an UnloadSeg call at the end of the main event loop.
The last nonrelocatable objectis the one that’s $100 bytes long. Nonrelocatable
blocks of $100 bytes are almost always master pointer blocks, and that’s what this
guy is. Why is it there? When you run out of available master pointers, the Memory
Manager calls MoreMasters, which creates another master pointer block. This can
be a problem if the heap is fragmented, since you're never really sure when the
system will run out of master pointers. To avoid this problem, you should call
MoreMasters yourself a few times in your initialization code.

247

248

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Going, going... gone!

Master pointers are used up more quickly than you

may realize, When you create a new window, for example, at least six master
pointers are used up, one for each
of the window record’s five regions and

one for its title, which is kept as a relocatable heap block. How many times
should you call MoreMasters? The easiest thing
to do is run your application
and really exercise it, opening lots ofwindows and desk accessories, and then
use the debugger to see how many master pointer blocks the system created.

You can then call MoreMasters that many times at the start of your application.

For the real fanatics, that method is a little wasteful. After all, why create
hundreds of master pointers that may never be used? A flashier and more

efficient technique is to monitor the number of free master pointers and then

call MoreMasters yourself when you're running low. One way to do thisis to

step throughthe free master pointerlist every time through the main event
loop, counting the number of available master pointers (the first free master

pointer’s addressis keptin the heap zone header; see Chapter 3 for more

information). Caution: this technique relies on. system data structures, and so
if you use it, you're subject to having the rug pulled out from under you.

There’s another nasty thing that our application is doing to the heap that isn’t

obvious. In our startup segment, we cleverly attempt to grow the heap to its
maximum possible size by asking for a very large handle (4,000,000 bytes). We do

this because the Memory Manager purges objects before growing the heap; so if we
force it to be grown now, we can prevent purging later. The problem with this is

that the Memory Manager goes through its usual allocation process before figuring
out that it doesn’t have 4 million bytes of free space. This process includes purging

all purgeable objects. So any objects that have the preload attribute set, which
means that they’re loaded when the resource file is opened, are purged now. This
doesn’t cause anything to break, but it does destroy the intent of marking things as
preloaded. And, of course, if the application just happens to be running on a Macintosh with more than 4 megabytes of RAM and MultiFinder is turned off, it just may
succeed in allocating the 4 million bytes, which wouldn’t do much good at all.
You can make the heap grow to its fullest size by calling MaxApplZone when
the application starts up. This will add all the growable heap space without purging anything.

More on debugging.

You can find an excellent article on debugging in issue

8 (Autumn 1991) of Apple’s develop magazine. This article, written by Bob

Johnson and Fred Huxham, talks about lots of nifty debugging tricks and tips
that you can use to help make your programs even more wonderful.

Chapter7

Real Live Debugging

By using logic, examination, and hunches, we've discovered a great deal about

what's going on in our application’s heap. What did we learn? Even in a small,
virtually useless program like this, we saw a lot and found a few surprises. For

example, we saw how windows and other relocatables are forced low when they're
allocated, preventing some possible fragmentation. As we discussed in Chapter 2,
this means that we should always make sure code segments are unloaded and
relocatables unlock whenever we create a new nonrelocatable block, like a window.
By examining our heap, we discovered several ways to improve the efficiency

of our memory management. Sure, this program contained some intentionally
obnoxious examples of bad things to do, but it’s a very small program, so just
imagine the atrocities that big programs can commit.

Special free bonus
At no extra charge, you'll find here in Listing 7-4 a C translation of Listing 7-2, the

good version of our program. It’s a very faithful translation: in most cases, the code
has been directly transformed to C, without a lot of optimizing for the new language. It'll be especially helpful to those of you who are Pascal programmers and
are just learning C. Have fun!

r

Listing

7-4.c.

/* Listing 7-4.c */

/* translation of 7-2 to C by Jim Friedlander */
#include

<types.h>

#include

<quickdraw.h>

#include

<fonts.h>

#include

<events.h>

#include

<osevents.h>

#include
#include

<controls.h>

<windows.h>

#include

<menus.h>

#include

<textedit.h>

#include

<dialogs.h>

#include

<desk.h>

#include

<toolutils.h>

#include

<scrap.h>

#include

<packages.h>

#include

<string.h>

#include

<strings.h>

/*resource IDs/menu IDs
#define

appleID

128

#define

fileID

129

#define

editID

130

for Apple,

File and Edit menus*/

249

250

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Listing 7-4.c.

/*index for each menu in myMenus
#define
#define
#define

appleM

(array of menu handles,

continued

0-based in C!!!!)*/

0

fileM

1

editM

2

/*total number of menus*/
menuCount
3
#define

/*item in Apple menu*/
#define

aboutItem

1

/*Items in E dit menu*/
undoItem
#define

1

#define

cutIitem

3

#define

copyiItem

4

#define

pasteItem

5

#define

clearItem

6

/*xitems in F ile menu*/
newItem
1
#define

#define

closeItem

#define

quitItem

3

5

/*default name for windows
#define

*/

WindName Window

/*distance to move for new windows*/
#define
windDX
25
windDY
#define
25

/*initial dimensions of window*/
#define

leftEdge

#define

topEdge

10

42

#define

rightEdge

#define

botEdge

/* global variables

210
175

*/

MenuHandle

myMenus [menuCount

Rect

dragRect;

Rect

screenRect;

Rect

txRect;

TEHandle

textH;

J];

/*handles to the menus*/
/*rectangle used to mark boundaries
for dragging window*/

Boolean

extendedCH;

Boolean

doneFlag;

EventRecord

myEvent;

WindowRecord

wRecord;

WindowPtr

myWindow;

WindowPeek

myWinPeek;

WindowPtr

whichWindow;

Rect

nextWRect

long

nextWNum;

’

/*to hold screenbits.bounds */
/*rectangle for text in application window*/
/*handle to Textedit record*/
/*true if user is Shift-clicking*/
/*true if user has chosen Quit Item*/
/*information about an event*/
/*information about the application window*/
/*pointer to wRecord*/
/*another pointer to wRecord*/
/*window in which mouse button was pressed*/
/*portRect for next window to be opended*/
/*number of next window (for title)*/

S

Chapter7

Real Live Debugging

Listing 7-4.c.

251

continued

GrafPtr

savedPort;

/*pointer to preserve GrafPort*/

Boolean

menusOK;

/*for disabling menu items*/

long

scrapErr;

short

scrCopyErr;

/* Lovely function prototypes to get error checking */
void SetUpMenus

(void);

void OpenWindow

(void);

void FixCursor

(void);

void DoCommand

(long command);

void KillWindow

(WindowPtr)
;

main

{

()

/*main program*/

InitGraf(&qd.thePort)
;
InitFonts();
FlushEvents(everyEvent,0);

InitWindows();

InitMenus();
TEInit();

InitDialogs(nil)
;
InitCursor();

SetUpMenus();
/* local procedure */
screenRect = qd.screenBits.bounds;
SetRect (&dragRect,4,24,screenRect.right-4,screenRect.bottom-—4)
;
doneFlag =
menusOK =

false;
false;

nextWNum = 1;
/*initialize window number*/
SetRect (&nextWRect, leftEdge, topEdge, rightEdge, botEdge) ;
/*initialize window rectangle*/
OpenWindow();
/*start with one open window*/
/* Main event loop */
do

{
SystemTask()j;

/* An exercise for the reader:

*/

/* add variable ‘curFrontWindow’ here instead of making all these calls */
if

(FrontWindow()

if

!= nil)

(((WindowPeek )FrontWindow())->windowKind >= 0)
FixCursor();

if

{

if

(!menusOK &&

(FrontWindow() == nil))

DisableItem (myMenus
DisableItem (myMenus
menusOK

=

true;

(textH

!= nil)

TEIdle(textH);

[fileM],
[editM],

closeItem)
;
0);

292

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

TM~

Listing 7-4.c.

if

continued

(GetNextEvent(everyEvent,
&myEvent) )
switch

(myEvent.what)

case

mouseDown:

switch

(FindWindow(myEvent.where,

&whichWindow)
)

{
case

inSysWindow:

SystemClick(&myEvent
, whichWindow) ;
break;

case

inMenuBar:

DoCommand(MenuSelect(myEvent.where)
);
break;

case

inDrag:

DragWindow(whichWindow,myEvent.where,
&dragRect) ;
break;

inContent:

case

if

(whichWindow

!= FrontWindow()
)

SelectWindow(whichWindow)
;
else

GlobalToLocal(&myEvent.where)
;
extendedCH =

((myEvent.modifiers

&

shiftKey)

!=

0);

TECLick(myEvent.where,extendedCH,textH);

}

/*else*/

break;

case

inGoAway:

if

(TrackGoAway
KillWindow

(whichWindow,

myEvent.where)
)

(whichWindow)
;

break;

}

/*switch FindWindow*/

break;
case

keyDown:

case

autoKey:

if

((myEvent.modifiers

& cmdKey)

!=

0)

DoCommand(Menukey(myEvent.message
else

TEKey((char) (myEvent.message

&

&

charCodeMask)
);

charCodeMask),textH);

break;

case activateEvt:
if

(myEvent.modifiers

{

&

01)

/*application window is becoming active*/
SetPort( (GrafPtr)myEvent.message);
textH =

(TEHandle)

((WindowPeek)myEvent.message)->refCon;

TEActivate(textH);

EnableItem

(myMenus[fileM],closeItem);

DisableItem(myMenus[editM],undolItem)
;

if

(((WindowPeek)FrontWindow())->nextWindow->windowKind <
scrCopyErr

=

TEFromScrap();

/*if myEvent.modifiers*/
else

/*

/*application window is becoming inactive*/

TEDeactivate( (TEHandle)
(WindowPeek )myEvent.message)->refCon));

*/

0)

Chapter7

293

Real Live Debugging

Listing 7-4.c.

continued

/* TEDeactivate( (TEHandle)

( (WindowPeek) (myEvent.message)->refCon));
TEDeactivate

*/

((TEHandle)

( (WindowPeek)myEvent.message)->refCon)
;

if

(((WindowPeek)FrontWindow())->windowKind <
EnableItem

(myMenus[editM],

scrapErr =

ZeroScrap();

scrCopyErr =

0)

undoItem);

TEToScrap();

}/*if WindowPeek*/
else

DisableItem

}

(myMenus[editM],

undoItem);

/*else*/

break;
case

updateEvt:

;
GetPort(&savedPo)rt
SetPort( (GrafPtr)myEvent.message)
;

BeginUpdate( ((WindowPtr)myEvent.message) );
EraseRect(&((WindowPtr)myEvent.message)->portRect)
;
(TEUpdate(&((WindowPtr )myEvent.message)->portRect,

(TEHandle)

( (WindowPeek )myEvent .message)->refCon)
);

EndUpdate( (WindowPtr)myEvent.message) ;
SetPort(savedPort);
break;

/*switch myEvent.what*/

}
}while

(!doneFlag);

return(0);

}

/*of main*/

void SetUpMenus

()

/* set up menus and menu bar */
short i;

myMenus[appleM] = GetMenu(appleID); /*read Apple menu* /

AddResMenu(myMenus[appleM], (ResType)’DRVR’);
myMenus[fileM] = GetMenu(fileID)
;
myMenus[{editM] = GetMenu(editID)
;
for

}

(i=0;i<menuCount;++i)

InsertMenu(myMenus[{i],0);

DrawMenuBar();
/
/*SetUpMenus*

void OpenWindow ()
{

char
char

/*add desk accessory names * /

/*read file menu */
/*read Edit menu */

/*install menus in menu bar */

/* and draw menu bar*/

/* Open a new window */

wNameDef[256];
nextWTitle[256];

/* to hold our default window title */
/* title of next window to be opened*/

204

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Listing 7-4.c.
char

continued

*wName;

NumToString (nextWNum, nextWTitle);
strcepy((char *)wNameDef,WindName)
;

/* prepare number for title */
/* WindName is a #define */
wName = strcat((char *)wNameDef,p2cstr ((char *)nextWTitle)
);
myWindow = NewWindow

(WindowPtr)-1,
SetPort

(nil,

true,

&nextWRect,

0);

c2pstr

(wName),

true,

noGrowDocProc,

/*open the window*/

(myWindow)
;

/*make

it the current port*/

txRect = qd.thePort->portRect;/*prepare TERecord for new window*/
InsetRect
textH

=

(&txRect,

TENew

myWinPeek =

if

(nextWRect.right

>

(nextWRect.bottom >

=

/*keep TEHandle

in refCon!*/

windDY);/*move window down and right*/

dragRect.right)

/*move back

-nextWRect.left +

if

leftEdge,

it’s too

far over*/

0);

dragRect.bottom)

(&nextWRect,

nextwWNumt+;
EnableItem

int)textH;

windDX,

(&nextWRect,

OffsetRect
menusOK

&txRect);

(long

(&nextWRect,

OffsetRect

if

0);

(WindowPeek )myWindow;

myWinPeek->refCon =

OffsetRect

4,

(&txRect,

0,

-nextWRect.top + topEdge);

/*bump number for next window*/

false;

(myMenus

[editM],0);

/*in case this

is

the only window*/

/* OpenWindow */

void KillWindow

(WindowPtr theWindow)

/*Close

a window and

throw everything away*/

TEDispose

(TEHand1le) (((WindowPeek) theWindow)->refCon);

TEDispose

((TEHandle)

*/

((WindowPeek)theWindow)->refCon)
;

/*throw away TERecord*/
DisposeWindow

(theWindow);

/*throw away WindowRecord*/

textH = nil;

if

(FrontWindow()

{

DisableItem

/*for

== nil)

/*if

(myMenus[fileM],

TEIdle

in main

no more windows,

closeItem);

SetCursor(&qd.arrow);

}

else

{

if

/* FrontWindow()

*/

(((WindowPeek)FrontWindow())->windowKind <

/*if a desk ace

{

!= nil

EnableItem

is coming up,

(myMenus[editM],

undoItem)
;

SetCursor(&qd.arrow);

}

else

DisableItem

}

} /* else */
/*KillWindow*/

(myMenus[editM],

0)

enable undo*/

undolItem)
;

event

loop*/

disable Close*/

Chapter7

Listing

/*

function MyFilter

/*

var itemHit:

pascal

(theDialog:

Integer):

Boolean MyModalFilter(DialogPtr
struct

short

short

theType;

Handle

theItem;

Rect

theBox;

long

finalTicks;

if

GetDItem

&

EventRecord;*/

theDialog,

*itemHit)

1,

==

&theType,

==
3))

13)

||

/*carriage return*/

/*enter*/

&theItem,

HiliteControl((ControlHandle)theItem,
Delay(8,

var theEvent:

continued

EventRecord *theEvent,

charCodeMask)

(theDialog,

7-4.c.

*/

(((theEvent->message & charCodeMask)

((theEvent~>message

{

DialogPtr;

Boolean;

295

Real Live Debugging

&theBox);

1);

&finalTicks);

HiliteControl((ControlHandle)theItem,

*itemHit =

0);

1;

return(true)
;

}

/*if BitAnd...*/

else
return(false);

}

/* MyModalFilter */

DoAboutBox(
)

{

short

itemHit;

myWindow = GetNewDialog(1000,
do

ModalDialog

}

while

(itemHit

DisposDialog

}

nil,

(WindowPtr)

(MyModalFilter, &itemHit);
!=

1);

(myWindow);

/*DoAboutBox*/

/*Execute Item specified by mResult,
void DoCommand

{

-1);

{

the result of MenuSelect*/

(long command)

short
short

theItem;
theMenu;

/*menu item number from mResult low-order word*/
/*menu number from mResult high-order word*/

char

name[256];

/*desk accessory name*/

theItem = LoWord(command);
theMenu

=

HiWord (command) ;

/*call Toolbox Utility routines to set
/* menu item number and menu number*/

*/

S

256

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

Listing 7-4.c.
switch

{

(theMenu)

case

if

/*switch on menu

continued

ID*/

appleID:

(theItem == aboutItem)
DoAboutBox(
);

else

{

GetItem(myMenus[appleM],theItem,name)
;

/*GetPort
scrapErr

(&savedPort)
;*/
=

scrCopyErr

(void)

/*SetPort

}

(myMenus

[editM],0);

(savedPort)
;*/

(FrontWindow()

!= nil)

EnableItem

(myMenus

[fileM],

closeItem)
;

EnableItem

(myMenus

[editM],

undoItem);

/*if FrontWindow*
/

menusOK

}

TEToScrap();

OpenDeskAcc (name);

EnableItem

if

ZeroScrap();

=

=

false;

/*if theItem...else*/

break;

case

fileID:

Switch

(theItem)

{
case

newltem:

OpenWindow(
);
break;
case

closelItem:

if

(((WindowPeek )FrontWindow())->windowKind < 0)
CloseDeskAcc( ( (WindowPeek) FrontWindow( ) )-—>windowKind) ;

/*if desk acc window,

close it*/

else

KillWindow(FrontWindow());

/*if it’s one of mine,

blow it away*/

break;
case quitItem:

doneFlag = true;

/*quit*/

break;

}

/*switch theItem*/

break;

case

editID:

if

(!SystemEdit(theItem-1)
)

switch

(theItem)

/*switch on menu

item number*/

{
case

cutItem:

TECut(textH);
break;
case

copyItem:

TECopy (textH) ;

break;

/*call TextEdit to handle Item*/

Chapter7

Real Live Debugging

257

~

Listing 7-4.c.
case

pastelItem:

TEPaste(textH);

break;
case

clearItem:

TEDelete(textH);

break;

}
/*switch theItem*/
/*switch theMenu*/

}

HiliteMenu(0);

}

/*DoCommands
/

void FixCursor

{

Point

mouseLoc;

GetMouse

if

()

(&mouseLoc);

(PtInRect

(mouseLoc,

&gqd.thePort->portRect)
)

SetCursor(*(GetCursor(iBeamCursor)
));
else
SetCursor(&qd.arrow)
;

}
Listing 7-4.r.

/*

listing 7-4.r */

#include Types.r
resource

‘/MENU’

(128)

{

128,
textMenuProc,

Ox7FFFFFFD,

enabled,

apple,
{

About

-,

Showoff...,

noIcon,

noKey,

noIcon,

noKey,

noMark,

plain

};
resource

‘/MENU’

(129)

{

129,
textMenuProc,

Ox7FFFFFF7,
enabled,

File,

{

New,
Open,

noIcon,
noIcon,

N,
O,

noMark,
noMark,

plain,
plain,

noMark,

plain,

continued

258

PART TWO

DEBUGGING

(—

Listing 7-4.r. continued

Close,

noIcon,

W,

noMark,

plain,

-, noIcon, noKey, noMark, plain,
Quit, noIcon, Q, noMark, plain

‘3
resource

‘MENU’

(130)

{

130,
textMenuProc,

Ox7FFFFFFC,
enabled,

Edit,

{

Undo,

-,

noIcon,

noIcon,

Cut,

noIcon,

Copy,

Z,

X,

noIcon,

Paste,

nolIcon,

Clear, noIcon,

};

noMark,

noKey,

noMark,

C,
V,

plain,

noMark,
noMark,
noMark,

noKey,

plain,

plain,
plain,
plain,

noMark,

plain

}

resource

{

‘DITL’

{61,

(1000,

191,

Button

81,

About

box)

{

251},

{

enabled,
OK

},

{8,

24,

56,

272},

StaticText {
disabled,

Example program\nby Scott Knaster
\nversion 3.0c¢
12/12/91

}

}

resource

{62,

‘DLOG’

100,

QBoxProc,

visible,
goAway,

Ox0,
1000,

New Dialog

(1000,

148,

About

412},

box)

{

>

Chapter7

Real Live Debugging

Things to remember

e Debuggers are a great help in finding bag anda ene can also be used to
examine your program'sbehaviorvery cl
d

better, stronger, and faster.

|

e Debugging requires amixture of mee ‘aadintuition, experimengranted

© You'lloftenandyourself running:
_ you justhaveto stickwithit and

_ ered to help find the:P

ation} you’ vealready gath- -

259

P

A

R

T

TT

H

R

E

E

Tips, Tricks, and Techniques
CHAPTER 8

General Techniques

CHAPTER 9

Toolbox Techniques

CHAPTER 10

Operating System Techniques

There’s a light in the darkness of
everybody's life.
—Brad and Janet, “Over at the Frankenstein Place”

261

C

H

A

P

T

E

R

8

General Techniques
In Part Three, we'll discuss specific tips and techniques that you can use in your

programs. Some techniques will discuss little-known goodies in the Macintosh
ROM, many of which are well documented in Inside Macintosh but have just been
lost in the shuffle of learning about the Macintosh. Other techniques aren't specifically documented in Inside Macintosh, but are very useful. For a few tips and
techniques, we'll present a complete sample program.

This section is divided into three chapters: General Techniques, which are
things that are generally useful for writing Macintosh programs; and Toolbox
Techniques and Operating System Techniques, which give you examples of fancy
and clever things you can do with those parts of the ROM.
Have fun!

Preflighting
Many of the Macintosh ROM calls return to you some kind of error status. For
example, when you make any Resource Manager calls, an error code will be placed
in the global ResErr, which you can read with the function called ResError. Similarly, the Memory Manager posts an error code in the global MemError after every
Memory Manager call.

If you make a ROM call from your application that results in an error, you can
deal with it in a friendly way; for example, if the user asks for another recordin your
database, you call NewHandle, and if it tells you that there’s not enough memory
left, you can tell the user that you can’t create any more records.

263

264

PART THREE

TIPS, TRICKS, AND TECHNIQUES

Remember that the ROM itself makes lots of ROM calls; for example, when
LoadSeg is called, it calls GetResource to load in the new CODE segment. If this
GetResource call fails for any reason, such as lack of memory or the resource not

being found, LoadSeg will put up system error 15. It doesn’t bother trying to report
an error to the application. How would it report it? Most application programmers
aren’t even aware when LoadSeg is being called and certainly aren’t prepared to

deal with an error from it.
There are lots of situations like this in the ROM, often dealing with memory

allocations. It works like this: your application makes a ROM call, which in turn

makes a memory request with NewHandle or NewPtr. If the request fails, the ROM
puts up a system error.

How can you prevent these situations from happening? If there were some

way for you to detect beforehand that the error was going to occur, you could avoid
starting the operation at all. You don’t have to be psychic to do this, although it
helps; you just have to anticipate what possible system problems could happen
when you do something in your program. This is called “preflight checking,” or
just preflighting: checking things out before you take off. Preflighting is a good
idea in general, because it’s better to find out about a potential problem before you

take off than while you’re in mid-air.
For example, let’s say you're about to put up a dialog. If you call GetNewDia-

log, the ROM will attempt to load the DLOG and DITL resources for the dialog with

GetResource. What if the call to load the DLOG fails? The GetNewDialog call,
which, like much of the ROM, has less than robust error checking, fails to detect the

error, and you're likely to crash quickly. All this makes the ROM sound like a
horrible citizen, but actually, the system has gotten much better in recent years

about handling these kinds of errors gracefully.
How can you prevent this kind of crash? Before calling GetNewDialog, you can
anticipate that the system is going to try to load the DLOG and DITL resources, so

you can try to load them yourself with GetResource. If a GetResource call returns a
Nil handle, it failed, and your program can gracefully report the error to the user.

If your GetResource calls are successful, you can proceed with the GetNewDialog
call. The resources will already be in memory, so it won’t have to load them again.

The important thing here is that you anticipated a situation in which the ROM
was going to make some ROM calls itself and ignore the error results. By calling

GetResource yourself, you preempted the ROM and made sure that the resources
were really there.
You can preflight all sorts of situations. When you’re about to do something

that will require memory to be allocated, you can try to make sure that you have
enough memory to complete the whole operation before you find yourself stuck
halfway through it. For example, when you ask the Finder to copy a bunch of files

from one disk to another and there’s not enough room for the copy, it tells you so
before it ever starts copying. This is because it preflights the copy; that is, it checks
to make sure that the destination disk has enough space on it to receive the copies

before ever starting.

Chapter8

General Techniques

Often, trying to preflight a situation will be tricky. Let’s say that you’re running

under System 6 with MultiFinder off, the user has chosen a desk accessory from the
Apple menu, and you want to preflight to make sure there’s enough memory to
open the desk accessory. What can you do? Your first instinct might be to find out
how big the desk accessory (the DRVR resource) is. Then you could see if a block of
that size is available in the heap.

In general, this is a pretty good strategy, but it has one problem: the desk
accessory may allocate memory of its own in the heap, and it may also load in other

resources. If you want to be a real fanatic about it, you can find all the resources in
the system resource file that are ‘““owned” by this desk accessory; the system applies
a special numbering convention to resources that belong to desk accessories (see
Inside Macintosh for details).
However, no matter what you do, you have no way of knowing how much

additional space the desk accessory will try to allocate with direct

NewHandle or

NewPtr calls. It's actually a pretty nasty thing for a desk accessory to try to allocate

a great chunk of memory; after all, a desk accessory is the application’s guest, and
it shouldn't do anything rude like ask for a ton of memory.
So about the best preflighting you can do before opening a desk accessory is to

get the size of the DRVR resource and see if there’s enough room in the heap to
accommodate it. If you want, you can also check the sizes of all the resources owned

by the desk accessory, too.
Sometimes you may have to preflight situations that require the enlargement
of an already existing heap block. For example, when you call PutScrap, you’re
increasing the size of a relocatable block, the global scrap. You might think that all

you have to dois check to see if there’s enough free heap space to accommodate the
additional bytes in the block. But this won’t necessarily work: when you're resizing
an existing block, not creating a new one, you're under some additional limitations.
In particular, if you’re making a relocatable block larger, it can’t move past a nonrelocatable block if it’s relocated. If you’re making a nonrelocatable larger, the

restrictions are even greater, since it can’t move at all.

How can you predict if growing the block will succeed? The surest way to do it
is actually to call SetHandleSize or SetPtrSize and check the returned error code to
see if the call succeeded. If it didn’t, your program can fail gracefully; if it did, you
can call SetHandleSize or SetPtrSize again to shrink the block back down and then
go ahead with your operation (such as calling PutScrap).

These are some hints about how to preflight in different situations. In practice,
you
ll come up with lots of different times when it’s appropriate to preflight before
doing something. When you're preflighting, try to think each situation through
clearly, understanding what's really happening when you do something, and then
check for possible problems before you start. That way you'll have the best chance

at saving your users from disaster, and they'll appreciate it.

265

266

PART THREE’

TIPS, TRICKS, AND TECHNIQUES

How to get around Pascal's type checking
On the Macintosh, a lot of information is kept in the low-memory globals. Sometimes you have to read the information that’s stashed away in these globals; sometimes you have to change them. From assembly language or C, that’s no problem.
But what can you do from Pascal?
As you may know, Apple’s MPW Pascal and the other Pascals that run on the
Macintosh aren't exactly standard—they’ve got some neat extensions to make
them more useful on a Macintosh. One of the most powerful of these extensions is
something called explicit type coercion, which is a great idea that’s stolen from C.
With explicit type coercion, you can actually assign values of one type to variables

of a different type. Not only is this feature useful for Macintosh programmers, it’s
absolutely essential.

Here’s how it works: let’s say you need to create a new relocatable heap object
that’s 50 bytes long. You want the handle to this object to be in a variable called
myJoeHandle, which you've declared like this:
type

Joe

=

Record

end;

intl,

int2:

strl:

string[5];

integer;

{joe}

JoePtr = “Joe;
JoeHandle = “JoePtr;
var

myJoeHandle:

JoeHandle;

You have to call

NewHandle to create the new heap object, but NewHandle

returns a variable of type Handle. If you try to write myJoeHandle : = NewHandle

(50), the compiler will refuse to compile it, saying that it’s a type-mismatch error.
You know that myJoeHandle and the generic type Handle returned by
NewHandle have exactly the same format; unfortunately, the compiler doesn’t

know that. You can convince the compiler that it’s OK, even though you're mixing
types. It’s done with explicit type coercion.

It's amazingly simple. All you have to do to coerce a variable of one type to
another type is use the desired type as if it were a function call. For example, you

can make the result of the

NewHandle call look like type Joehandle just by writing

this: myJoeHandle : = JoeHandle (NewHandle (50)). This sends a message to the
compiler saying, ‘“Yes, I know that NewHandle and myJoeHandle have different
types, but I know what I’m doing, I’m over 18 (or whatever), so let me do it.” For

more about this technique, see the section Random Access File I/O in Chapter 10.
You can also use explicit type coercion to change or get the value of any
memory location. To do this, you should first declare a variable of a pointer type.

Chapter8

General Techniques

Exactly which pointer type depends on the size of the thing in memory you want
to look at or change. Asan example, let’s get the value of HeapEnd, which isa

global

located at address $114. HeapEnd is a long word (4 bytes), so we need to declare a
pointer to a 4-byte object, like a Pascal Longint:
var

thePtr:

“Longint;

Next, we have to declare a variable to hold the value of HeapEnd. This is an
ordinary Longint:
theValue:

Longint;

Now we're ready. First, we have to make thePtr point to the right location, which
is $114. We can do this with a type-coerced assignment statement:
thePtr

:= pointer

($114);

A couple of things here need explanation. First, $114 is a real, live, legal MPW
Pascal number. Any number that begins with a dollar sign is treated as a hexadecimal constant. The other curious part of this assignment is the pointer around $114.

Whatis this? It’s type coercion, as you might have guessed. But we said that explicit
type coercion required a specific type name. Usually, it does; however, pointer is a

special case. It’s sort of a generic type coercion function. It coerces the value in
parentheses to whatever type is necessary to make the compiler happy. In this case,
it makes the value of thePtr be $114; in other words, it makes thePtr point to $114.
Now that our pointer is set up, all we have to do is dereference it and assign it

to the Longint:
thevalue

.

:= thePtr’;

That’s all there is to it. The variable theValue now contains the Longint value
from location $114, which is HeapEnd. You can use this technique to access any

byte in memory.

A very similar technique is used when you want to change the value of any

byte in memory. This can be very useful, for example, when you're installing
routines into any of the various low-memory hooks, like DragHook or MenuHook.
Let’s say you want to have a routine installed in DragHook, which is a pointer
at $9F6. When the user drags a window around, the system looks to see if there’s an
address of a routine stored in DragHook,; if so, it calls that routine while it’s dragging.

267

268

PART THREE

TIPS, TRICKS, AND TECHNIQUES

To use DragHook, we first declare the routine we want to install there.
procedure MyDragHook;

begin
SystemTask;
end;

{MyDragHook}

This little procedure simply calls SystemTask, which is the ROM call that makes

sure that desk accessories perform their periodic actions; for example, the alarm
clock desk accessory uses this to update the time it’s displaying. By calling SystemTask from DragHook, the alarm clock should be able to update its display even
while windows are being dragged. Usually, of course, the clock stops ticking while

you
re dragging windows.
Now we have to put myDragHook’s address in the global DragHook location.
Here’s the code to do that:
thePtr

thePtr”

:=

pointer

($9D6);

:= @myDragHook;

{make

thePtr

point

to DragHook}

{put address of myDragHook in $9D6}

This makes the DragHook global point to our myDragHook procedure. You
can use this technique to change the value of any byte in memory. Remember the
compiler is trusting you, so behave yourself. You can easily use this feature to trash

your program if you want or if you're not careful.

Which registers you can use
If you're writing assembly language code you have to be concerned with register
usage. Since your program must interact with ROM calls, desk accessories, definition procedures, and all the other lively inhabitants of Macintosh memory, and

since all those guys have to use the same registers you do, you have to make sure
that nobody steps on anybody else’s toes.

To allow all the programs in the Macintosh to coexist, there are strict rules for
register usage. You have to follow these rules when you’re writing assembly lan-

guage code; otherwise, some piece of code will expect a value ina register and crash
when that value isn’t right.
There are two points of view for register usage: either (1) you’re about to calla

routine that may change the value of registers (trash them, it’s called) and you want
to know which registers will not be changed, or (2) you’re writing a routine that will

be called by someone else (a patched trap, for example, or a VBL task), and you
want to know which registers you may trash without upsetting the caller. We'll
look at register conventions from both of these viewpoints.

First, let’s introduce some general rules about register usage on the Macintosh.
Register A7, which is the stack pointer, is special. A good rule is never to use it as
anything but the stack pointer. Also, if you mess around with A7, you should

Chapter8

General Techniques

disable the stack sniffer by saving location $110 (StkLowPt) and zeroing it to prevent
system errors from ruining your day. Be sure to restore StkLowPt when you’re done.
Register AS is used to find lots of things in the Macintosh. It points to a list of

things called the application parameters, the first of which is always a pointer to the
QuickDraw global variable thePort. All the ROM routines that use QuickDraw

globals (including QuickDraw itself) rely on A5 containing the value that it’s initialized to at application startup time. It’s also used to jump to routines in other

segments, since jump table entries are expressed as A5-relative offsets.
Because A5 is so important, you should avoid changing it. If you must change

it, be sure to restore it before calling any ROM routines or any routines in other
segments. There’s a system global called CurrentA5 at $904 that contains the
“right” value of A5; it’s set up when the application is launched.
Register A6 doesn’t have any official use by the system. Many routines, espe-

cially Toolbox routines and compiled code, use A6 as a local frame pointer; in other
words, they execute a LINK A6 instruction when they begin. Using A6 this way can
help you debug, since it allows you to track down procedures’ parameters and local

variables. If you want, though, you can use Aé6 for other things.
There are several registers that are generally available for trashing by any

routine. These registers are AO, A1, DO, D1, and D2. If you’re writing an assembly
language routine, you can usually destroy the contents of these registers. If you're
calling a ROM routine from assembly language, in most cases you should count on
these registers being modified.
Let’s explain the “usually” and the “in most cases” in the previous paragraph.

Calls to the Operating System preserve registers Al, D1, and D2. These extra
registers are preserved by the trap dispatcher. In addition, all OS routines that

don’t return a result in AO preserve the contents of AO. This is done through the use
of a parameter bit in the trap word, bit 8. For calls that return a result in AO, bit 8 of

the trap word is set; calls that don’t return anything in AO (which is most of them)
have bit 8 clear. The saving and restoring of AQ, if it’s required, is done by the trap
dispatcher.
Registers A2 through A4 and D3 through D7 are not preserved by the trap
dispatcher, but all ROM routines and high-level language routines must preserve

them. This means that an assembly language routine that’s called by someone else
(like a trap patch) can use these registers if it wants to, but it must save and restore
them if it does.
If a routine uses registers that it must preserve, the easiest way to preserve

them is with the 68000’s Move Multiple instruction (spelled MOVEM). This single

magic instruction moves the values of any combination of registers into a specified
area of memory, or from memory back to the registers.

Let’s say you’re writing a patch for a Toolbox trap, and you want to use registers AO, A1, A2, A3, DO, D1, D2, D3, and D4. You don’t have to worry about preserving the contents of AO, A1, D0, D1, or D2, since they're considered trashable and
the programs that call your patch can’t expect them to remain unchanged. You

269

270

PART THREE

TIPS, TRICKS, AND TECHNIQUES

have to preserve A2, A3, D3, and D4. You can do this by saving their values on the

stack with a MOVEM instruction when your routine begins, like this:
MOVEM.L D3/D4/A2/A3,-(A7)

;save registers on stack

This instruction will save the specified registers on the stack. At the end of the
routine, we can get them back with another MOVEM:
MOVEM.L

(A7)+,D3/D4/A2/A3

;restore contents of registers

That's all you have to do. You could save and restore lots more registers in your
MOVEM instruction. That wouldn't hurt anything, but it wastes a little time and
stack space to save and restore registers that you never use.

Here’s a chart that summarizes what happens to registers in various situations:

If you call one of the following:

These may be changed _ These will be preserved

Toolbox trap

AO, A1, DO, D1, D2

A2-A6, D3-D7

OS trap

DO

A0-A6, D1-D7

OS trap with result in AO

AO, DO

A1-A6, D1-D7

Routine in an application

AO, Al, D0, D1, D2

A2-A6, D3-D7

Toolbox trap patch

AO, Al, DO, D1, D2

A2-A6, D3-D7

OS trap patch

AO, Al, DO, D1, D2

A2-A6, D3-D7

(trap dispatcher preserves for
OS traps)

AO, Al, D1, D2

Callable application routine

AO, Al, DO, D1, D2

A2-A6, D3-D7

VBL task

A0-A3, D0O-D3

A4-A6, D4-D7

- °» Youshould try to anticipateyour program’ s needs by preflighting situa-. tions before actually performing major actions.

| . Most Pascals that work on the Macintosh allow you to defeat Pascal’s strong

__

type checking with explicit type coercion.

© Well-defined register conventions dictate which of the 68000’s registers can
be used by different kinds of routines.

|

C

H

A

P

T

E

R

9

Toolbox Techniques
In this chapter, we'll discuss some of the more interesting and obscure things that

you can do with the Toolbox. Most of these things are accessible from assembly or
high-level languages. Most of them are documented in Inside Macintosh but are

little known, little used, or not often asked about.

Writing a definition function in a high-level language
As you probably know, the scheme used by the Toolbox for windows, menus, and

controls is very flexible. The appearance of each of these things is controlled by a

definition function. There are a few standard definition functions, which are stored
in the system resource file or the ROM as resources of type WDEF (for windows),
CDEF (for controls), and MDEF (for menus).

There are two standard WDEFs. The first, WDEF 0, is the one that’s almost

always used. It draws the familiar square-cornered window in several varieties:
with or withouta title bar, with or without a grow box in the lower right corner, and
several others. Virtually all the windows you see in Macintosh applications are
drawn with this WDEF, including dialogs and alerts.
The other standard WDEF, which has resource ID 1, draws windows with
rounded corners. The most common example of this type of window is the standard calculator desk accessory.
There are also two standard control definition functions. The first is CDEF 0,
which is used to draw buttons, check boxes, and radio buttons. The other is CDEF
1, which draws scroll bars.

271

2/2

PART THREE

TIPS, TRICKS, AND TECHNIQUES

There’s only one standard MDEF (menu definition). It has resource ID 0, and it
can draw menus with textual items, check marks and icons to the left of the items,
command key equivalents to the right, a style such as italic, bold, or underlined,
and a dimmed appearance to show that the item is disabled.

Because of the nifty generality that’s built into the Window, Control, and Menu
Managers, you can write your own definition functions if you want to have things
that don’t behave the way the standard ones do. For example, if you want to define
a menu that shows patterns or lines, like MacDraw’s, you can write your own
MDEF; if you want a window that’s round or shaped like California, you can write
your own WDEF.
The details for writing your own definition function (usually called a defproc,

short for “definition procedure”) are in Inside Macintosh. Although it’s easiest to
write them in assembly language, you can also write one in a high-level language.

If you do, though, there are a couple of things that you have to be aware of.

The most important thing to remember is that the defproc must end up as a
resource that runs on its own, with no global “world” set up off A5. This means that

if you write your defproc in a high-level language it can’t have any global variables.
Since the compiler will allocate those global variables off A5, they won’t be there
when the defproc runs, because the application that loaded the defproc will have

its global world defined.
This restriction on globals means you can’t use QuickDraw globals either, since

AS is used to figure out where they are, too. The other important restriction on

defprocs is that they must not have multiple segments. You can understand why if
you remember our discussion of jump tables back in Chapter 6. Jumps between
segments work because of the jump table, and the jump table is owned by the

application, with no space for defprocs and other obscure blobs of code.
Since most compilers, especially Pascal compilers, always assume that they’re
going to be compiling a complete program, they usually produce code that has the
global world set up at the start and global world destruction at the end. Of course,
this won’t work for a defproc.
Most of the popular development systems, including MPW and THINK, include
clever ways to work around the no-A5 problem. These systems even let you have

globals in your standalone code, a great advance over the early days of Macintosh
programming. If you're using MPW, you can see an example of standalone code by

examining the EditCdev sample. To learn more about creating these kinds of programs in high-level languages, take a look at Macintosh Technical Note #256.

Logical clipping
Many years after its first version appeared, QuickDraw still provides a powerful
and flexible function for Macintosh graphics. QuickDraw has to be good, because the
system relies so heavily on it for drawing things on the screen. If QuickDraw wasn’t

really quick, the whole user-interface metaphor would be in danger of breaking down.

Chapter9

Toolbox Techniques

QuickDraw’s flexibility has an effect on the way applications are written. In
particular, QuickDraw’s clipping ability allows you to draw “outside the lines” and

still have everything come out all right, since no lines will be drawn outside the
clipRgn or the visRgn.
Many programs use QuickDraw’s clipping ability in a lazy fashion. They know

that nothing outside the visRgn will be drawn, so they don’t bother trying to
restrict the area that’s drawn when an update event is processed. Of course, this

doesn’t cause anything incorrect to be drawn on the screen, since QuickDraw
really does clip to the visRgn.
Although no extra lines are drawn, you do pay a penalty for this sort of sloppy
drawing. QuickDraw takes some time to figure out what to clip, and if you do a lot

of drawing commands that QuickDraw will clip, you'll pay a speed penalty.
Although it's still fast, even with lots of clipping, you can really improve performance by using some logic about what should be drawn before calling the drawing

commands. This technique is called logical clipping.
When you use logical clipping, you simply try to figure out the minimum
amount of stuff that has to be drawn before calling any QuickDraw drawing commands. Usually, you'll find that you can logically decide a lot of drawing isn’t

necessary; it'll be faster for you to figure that out than to let QuickDraw clip it out.
For example, before drawing a rectangle, you could test to see if the rectangle is

within the region or rectangle to be drawn. If not, you wouldn’t bother with the
drawing command, and the nondrawing decision would probably be faster. Time

it for yourself!

You can take the what-to-draw decision too far, of course. In general, it’s a good
idea to narrow the drawing down to the smallest possible rectangle you can figure.

In fact, another handy tip for fast drawing is to use rectangles, rather than regions,
whenever you want to draw fast and you don’t mind drawinga little more than
necessary. This is because nonrectangular regions are somewhat more complex
than rectangles and so take a little longer to process.
For example, if you want to test a rectangle to see if it’s within the update region
after an update event, you could call RectlnRgn. Remember, though, that every
region has as a part of its data structure a field called rgnBBox, which is a rectangle

that completely encloses the region. If you pull this field out of the region (by

double-dereferencing the region’s handle) and then test manually for inclusion in
this rectangle, you'll almost certainly be faster. Again, the only way to find out is to

time it for yourself.

Using ResErrProc
One of the stickiest problems to deal with in the Macintosh ROM is error detection.

Most applications call the ROM thousands of times during their execution, and
many calls can return errors. Few programs (and programmers) are disciplined
enough to check the error result from every call, although you really should.

273

274

PART THREE

TIPS, TRICKS, AND TECHNIQUES

Some of the most common and deadly errors that an application has to deal
with are errors returned by the Resource Manager. These errors are not reported
directly in the calls, but instead are put into a global called ResErr, which you can

read with the ROM call ResError. It’s sucha

pain to have to check ResErr after every

Resource Manager call that most applications don’t bother to do so.

Compounding this problem is the fact that the Resource Manager sometimes
returns errors when you least expect them. For example, when you call ChangedResource, the Resource Manager will return an error if, for example, the disk is
locked or full and the resource can't be written to the disk. Very few applications
plan for that one.
There’s another interesting way to check for resource errors, though very few
applications use it, probably because it’s very obscure. There’s yet another system

global, this one called ResErrProc, which is a pointer to a resource error-handling

procedure. If you install a pointer to a procedure in ResErrProc, the Resource Manager
will call this procedure whenever a resource error occurs. So, instead of having to
call ResError after every Resource Manager call, you can simply install a pointer to

a procedure in ResErrProc. This is the principle of “don’t call us, we'll call you.”
One problem with this technique is that the error-handling procedure can tell
only what the error was (by calling ResError). This procedure doesn’t know any
more about the call, such as which call it was or who called it. In fact, the procedure

can’t even be sure that it was a Resource Manager call from the application that
caused the error; it might have been a desk accessory that did it.
You can learn at least a little more about the routine that caused the error by
looking at the address on the top of the stack in your error-handling procedure

(easier to do in assembly language, obviously). This address is the return address
back to the instruction following the Resource Manager call that caused the error.
From this, you can learn both the call that caused the error and the place the call

was made.
While you’re debugging your application, you can use this information to find

places where strange things are going on by breaking into the debugger when a
Resource Manager error occurs. After you've found the last bug (hah!) and your
application is shipping, you can use ResErrProc instead of having to call ResError
all the time. Under System 6, be prepared to deal with errors that you didn’t cause,
though, since you'll get called for errors that desk accessories cause, too. A technique you might use to find out if you've got one of these would be to examine the

windowkKind field of the frontmost window. If it’s negative, you should ignore the
error and let the desk accessory handle it.
If you use ResErrProc, be careful of one common problem that’s not reported in
a ResError result. If GetResource fails to find the resource, it returns Nil, but no
ResError is generated. So, if you install a ResErrProc, you'll still have to check for Nil

handles upon return from GetResource.

Chapter9

Toolbox Techniques

Moving a resource from one file to another
If you ever have to write a program that puts resources in a file (an installer
program, we'll call it), you'll need to know about moving a resource from one file to
another. On the surface, this doesn’t seem too hard. However, a few little traps are
lurking beneath this innocent appearance, and you should be aware of them before
you try moving resources.

To make sure that you're getting the resource out of the right file and putting

it into the new file, you can use the UseResFile call. This call will make sure that the
resource file that’s being used is the right one. Be sure to call UseResFile before any

resource getting (with GetResource) or resource adding (with AddResource).
A single resource in memory cannot belong to more than one resource file. This
means that if you simply try to call GetResource to get the thing, UseResFile to set

up the new file, and AddResource to add it to the new file, you'll fail. You must first
call DetachResource to remove the resource’s attachment to the file that it’s coming
from. Calling DetachResource does not remove the resource from the file; it just

turns the copy that’s in memory into an ordinary relocatable block, not a resource.
Another potential pitfall is in the copying of the resource’s attributes. When

you install the resource in the new file, you'd like it to have the same attributes it
had in the old file. Your first shot at doing this might simply be to call GetResAttrs

on the old resource and SetResAttrs on the new one. Gotcha! After adding the

resource to the new file, its resChanged attribute is set; this tells the Resource
Manager that it needs to write this guy out to the file when the file is closed. If you

call GetResAttrs to get the old resource’s attributes and SetResAttrs on the new
copy, you'll blast the resChanged flag back to off, and the resource will never get
written to the file! To get around this problem, you have to turn the resChanged
attribute on after getting the old resource’s attributes by adding the constant
resChanged to the attributes before calling SetResAttrs.

If this is all getting a bit hairy, hang in there. We're almost done, and it’s
summarized at the end, with a sample program.

The final killer in this operation is one that’s not really obvious. When you add
a resource to a file, the Resource Manager doesn’t check to see if the file already has

a resource with the type and ID you're trying to add. If you call AddResource and
the current resource file already has a resource of that type and ID, the new one will
be added to the file, but the old one will not be removed and no error will be
reported. Worst of all, future GetResource calls will never return the new resource
that you just added, since the one that was there previously comes before the new

one in the resource file’s map; and as soon as the Resource Manager finds it, it will
use that one! This means that the new resource you just added to the file is impossible to access (see Figure 9-1).

This is not good. To avoid this happening, before calling AddResource to put
the resource in the new file, you must check to see if the file already has a resource
of that type and ID (by calling GetResource), and if so, remove it with RmveRe-

source. Then, when you add the new one, it'll be the only one in the file.

275

276

PART THREE

TIPS, TRICKS, AND TECHNIQUES

Resource map

Part of resource file

Type FUZZ, ID 12

Spud 492 data

Type FUZZ, ID 93
Type Spud ID 492
Type BONO, ID 2

Type BONO, ID2_f

BONO 2 data
(original)

Type BONO, ID 19

Type JONE, ID 277 |)
Type JONE, ID 933

|

_ Resource Manager
cannot see this
—

resource

BONO 2 data
(newly added)

Type JONE, ID 1000 |

Type WOLF, ID 99

Figure 9-1.

|

BONO 19 data

Orphaned resource

Picture this scenario: someone not as smart as you has called AddResource
without checking to see if the file already had a resource with that type and ID, so
aresource file already has two of, let’s say, type JANE and ID 15. Then your installer

program is run, and one of the resources it installs is JANE 15. Before calling

AddResource, it finds that there’s already a JANE 15 in the new file, so it calls
RmveResource to take it away and then adds the new one. But wait—there’s still

one left in the old file, and the new one will be inaccessible! If you want to be
paranoid, you should keep calling GetResource after your RmveResource until

you're sure that there are no old copies remaining.

Differentnames. Thereis one situation where two resources in the same file
with the same type and ID can both be accessed. If they have different

resource names, they can be accessed with GetNamedResource. However,

this is a pretty bizarre technique, and since it’s not documented by Apple, it

may not be supported in the future.

Now we can summarize the steps to go through to move a resource from

one file to another.
1.

Open both files (if one is the application, you don’t have to open it, of course).

2.

Be sure that you set the current resource file properly with UseResFile before
any GetResource or AddResource calls.

Chapter9

Toolbox Techniques

Get the resource to be copied and call DetachResource on it.
Get the resource’s attributes.

See if the new file already contains a resource of this type and ID (by calling
GetResource); if so, remove it with RmveResource.

Repeat step 5 until the GetResource call returns Nil, meaning that it didn’t find
the resource.

Set the right file with UseResFile and put the resource in the new file with
AddResource.

Call SetResAttrs with the value you got in step 4; then call ChangedResource.
Close both resource files (unless one is the application—don't close it!).

By making sure you do all these nonobvious things, you'll be able to move
resources around. Note that you actually don’t have to close the resource files;
when the application exits, they'll be closed automatically, but it’s a good idea to
force them closed before quitting in case the user reboots or something obnoxious
like that.

The sample program shown in Listing 9-1 shows you some real live code that
moves a resource from one file to another.

a

Listing

{

9-1.p.

listing 9-l.p Copy a resource

{Jim Friedlander
{
{
{

}

Macintosh Technical Support
modified
modified
modified

1/4/86 }
3/11/86}
3/20/86}
12/12/91}

program resTest;

USES

Memtypes,

Quickdraw, OSIntf,

ToolIntf, PackIntf;

{$D+}
CONST

DefaultVol = 0;

{vRef number of default volume}

VAR

AddToFileName

:

AddToFileRefNum
AppFileRefNum
myWindow

: integer;
: integer;
: WindowPtr;

Str255;

wRect

:

rect;

replaced

:

Boolean;

277

278

PART THREE

TIPS, TRICKS, AND TECHNIQUES

Listing
rType

:

ResType;

rID

:

integer;

copyErr

:

integer;

err

:

integer;

numstr

:

Str255;

9-1l.p.

continued

{
FUNCTION

CopyAResource(rType:

copyToFName:

ResType;

str255;

vRef:

rID:

integer;

integer):

integer;

VAR

HResToBeCopied

:

Handle;

hResToCopyTo

:

Handle;

attrs

:

integer;

oldVol

:

integer;

Begin

{CopyAResource}

HResToBeCopied:= GetResource(rType,rID);
If

(ResError

<>

noErr)

or

(HResToBeCopied = NIL)

(HomeResFile(HResToBeCopied)

or

<> AppFileRefNum)

then Begin
CopyAResource:= ResError;{copy failed}

EXIT(CopyAResource) ;
End;
{NOTE:

{If

{EXIT back to caller}

(ResError....}

EXIT

above

{a resource of
attrs:=

--

the

at

this

point we

desired type

and

know we’ve

got}

id}

GetResAttrs(HResToBeCopied)
;

replaced:= FALSE;

{initialize

DetachResource(HResToBeCopied);
err:=

GetVol(nil,oldVol);

err:=

SetVol(nil,vRef);

{so we

{get the

can

default

{OpenResFile

only

copy

this}
it}

volume}

opens

files

on

AddToFileRefNum:= OpenResFile(copyToFName)
;
If ResError

<>

noErr

then

{NOTE:

failed}

SetVol(nil,oldVol);{restore default vol}

EXIT (CopyAResource) ;
End;

vol}

Begin

CopyAResource:= ResError;{copy

err:=

default

{EXIT back to caller}

{if}

EXIT above --

at this

{opened the desired resource

point we know we've}
file}

UseResFile(AddToFileRefNum);

{in case the

repeat

all

{repeat,

stripping

out

rTypes with

hResToCopyTo:= GetResource(rType,rID);
If

HomeResFile(hResToCopyTo)

{it’s

in the

file we want to

file was

{we

rID

in

already open}
the

know this

= AddToFileRefNum then

target

won’t

file}

fail

here

11}

Begin

copy to}

RmveResource(hResToCopyTo);

{remove

from the

resource

file}

y,

Chapter9

Toolbox Techniques

Listing 9-l.p.

279

continued

DisposHandle(hResToCopyTo); {free up space in heap}
replaced:= TRUE;

{we

found one}

End;

until

(HomeResFile(hResToCopyTo) <> AddToFileRefNum)
;

AddResource(hResToBeCopied,rType,rID,’’);
if ResError <> noErr then
CopyAResource:=

Else

{put in the new one}

{Copy was unsuccessful}

ResError

Begin

;
SetResAttrs(hResToBeCopied,attrs)
{ set attributes, this clears, however,
}
{ the resChanged (write) bit of the attributes,

so we need to}
{ set it with the following ChangedResource call, or the resource}
{ will not get written, though the map will.}
ChangedResource (hResToBeCopied) ;
If ResError = noErr then Begin
CopyAResource:= noErr;

{successful!}

CloseResFile(AddToFileRefNum);{this updates too!!}

End

Else Begin{ChangedResource reported an error}
CopyAResource:= ResError;

;
CloseResFile(AddToFileRefNum)
End;
End;

{else}

{Else}

err:= SetVol(nil,oldVol);
End;

{CopyAResource}

{nanan

nn = nn nnn nn nn nnn nnn nn

{restore default vol}

nner

}

-

Begin {main program}
InitGraf (@thePort);
InitFonts;
InitWindows;
TEInit;

InitDialogs

(nil);

AddToFileName:= ‘JimsResFile’;
{resource type we want to copy}
rType:= ‘’DITL’;

rID:= 5555;

{id of resource of type rType that we want to copy}

SetRect (wRect,40,40,400,250);

myWindow:= NewWindow(NIL,wRect, ‘Results’ ,TRUE,rDocProc,pointer(-1),
FALSE,0);

{create new window}

SetPort (myWindow) ;

we’ll create (or just open) the file
{here, for this example,
In your program, this file may already exist}
that we're copying to.
{in real life -- check for errors after this}
CreateResFile(AddToFileName) ;

_/

280

PART THREE

TIPS, TRICKS, AND TECHNIQUES

~

Listing
AppFileRefNum:=

{copy

CurResFile;

a resource

copyErr:=

into

the

{so we

file

on the

restore

default

continued

later}

volume}

CopyAResource(rType,rID,AddToFileName,DefaultVol);

UseResFile(AppFileRefNum) ;

{the

can

9-l.p.

following can be

removed --

{use our app’s res

just

for

file}

testing}

MoveTo(20,20);

If

copyErr =

noErr then

Begin

DrawString(’'Everything worked

If

OK’);

replaced then Begin
MoveTo(20,40);

DrawString(’Resource was

End;
End

replaced’);

{if}

{if}

else

Begin
NumToString(copyErr,numStr)
;

DrawString(concat(’Resource not
{Else}

End;

copied

FlushEvents(everyEvent,0);
repeat

until

button;

End.

Listing

/*

9-l.r

listing

9-l.r

#include

Types.r

resource

‘’DITL’

*/

(5555,

purgeable)

{

{
{80,

40,

Button

100,

100},

{

enabled,

OK

}y

{80,

150,

Button

100,

210},

{

enabled,

Cancel

},

{8,

90,

75,

StaticText

360},
{

disabled,
Dixie Walker
looked
of

};

}

}

a

like

tree.

said Ewell
a man

Blackwell

falling

out

[Error

‘,numStr,’]’));

Chapter9

Toolbox Techniques

The easy way to smooth animation
Or, smooth animation for the rest of us.
Programmers are always looking for a way to make their applications look

better. If you've ever written an application that does animation or draws lots of
rapidly changing graphics, you’ve probably come across the smooth animation
problem.

The problem is this: if you’re redrawing the screen a lot, you'd like the newly
redrawn image to blend with the old one as smoothly as possible. Most program-

mers’ first instinct on this is to do the redrawing as fast as possible, on the theory

that this will help prevent the dreaded screen flicker, the awful effect you see a lot
in poorly written animation programs.

If you try this, though, you'll soon see that no matter how fast you redraw the
thing you’re animating, even in assembly language, it still seems to flicker. Here is
where a lot of programmers go astray, because the answer to this problem requires
a little understanding of how the display hardware works (don’t worry, the
amount of understanding it takes isn’t enough to be painful).

A computer does not redraw its entire screen instantaneously. Instead, it
moves the electron beam across the screen, drawing as it goes—very fast, you bet,
but not instantaneously! The beam starts at the upper left corner of the screen and

moves from left to right, drawing the image. When it reaches the right edge, it

retraces its way back across the screen to the left edge without drawing. When it
reaches the left edge, it moves down one row and starts drawing again. It repeats this
drawing and retracing step for each line on the screen until it has drawn the last line.
After drawing the last line, the beam must retrace all the way back to the upper
left corner to start drawing the whole screen again. So it moves diagonally from the
lower right, where it finished drawing the last line, to the upper left, where it begins
drawing the first line again.

As the beam moves across and down the screen, the areas on the screen that it

has already passed are refreshed as they change. If you change parts of the screen
that the beam has already passed, the image is redrawn immediately and you get a
flicker. The trick to avoiding flicker is to keep your drawing ahead of the beam; that

is, draw the uppermost parts of the screen first and then the lower parts.

The time when the beam is retracing back to the beginning of the next line is
called the horizontal retrace period. Similarly, the much longer time when the
beam is traveling from the bottom of the screen back to the top is called the vertical
retrace period (these are also called horizontal and vertical blanking periods). Any
drawing that takes place during these blanking periods will result in a smooth

display, since the changes will not actually take place until the beam comes out of
the retrace period.

The horizontal blanking period is too short to do any drawing, but the vertical
retrace period is, by computer standards, at least a pause, about 1.2 milliseconds
(thousandths of a second). Any drawing that you can complete during that time
will be flicker free.

281

282

PART THREE

TIPS, TRICKS, AND TECHNIQUES

How do you know when the vertical retrace period begins? Aha! Good question! The Macintosh kindly provides an interrupt at the beginning of each and

every vertical retrace period (called, as you might guess, the vertical retrace interrupt). This happens 60 times every second. What’s more, when a vertical retrace
interrupt occurs, the Macintosh executes a regular series of tasks that includes
incrementing the Ticks counter (a system global), checking to see if the mouse has
moved, and other stuff.

In addition to doing its built-in things at vertical retrace interrupt time, the
Vertical Retrace Manager in the ROM will also execute any tasks that you have

given it. You tell the ROM about these routines with the VInstall call. After you’ve
installed a routine with VInstall, the ROM will call it when a vertical retrace interrupt occurs.

One inherent limitation of vertical retrace tasks is that they run at interrupt
time. This means that they’re really restricted: they can’t make any calls that allo-

cate or deallocate memory, they can’t rely on unlocked handles, and so on (see
Appendix B for more information). There’s a way to get around this restriction.
The first thing the Macintosh does whena vertical retrace interrupt occurs is to

increment the global variable Ticks, which you can read with the ROM call TickCount. This means that if your application waits patiently in a tight loop for Ticks

to change (by calling TickCount repeatedly), you'll gain control very soon after the
vertical retrace period has begun, and you'll have the advantage of not having to

operate at interrupt time, freeing yourself from the interrupt-time restrictions. In
practice, it looks like this:
{var tickValue
tickValue

repeat until
{start

:

Longint;}

:= TickCount;
(tickValue

drawing,

{get
<>

value

of

Ticks}

TickCount)

fast!}

With this technique, tickValue gets the value of TickCount. Then the repeat
loop simply waits until TickCount changes. When it does, the program drops out of
the loop. When this happens, the program knows that the vertical retrace interrupt
has just occurred, and it should start updating its screen. It should start by redoing
the upper part of the screen, since that’s the place the beam will arrive first. It can

be alittle more leisurely about updating the lower part of the screen, since the beam
has to travel a bit before getting there.
If your animation is fairly simple, you can use this technique to help prevent a

flickering screen. Even if this doesn’t eliminate your flicker completely, it should
help, and it’s really easy to implement.

Another handy way to create smooth animation is to use a technique known as
the off-screen bitmap. In this technique, you create a QuickDraw bitmap that uses

heap or stack storage—not the screen—to keep its image. You can use Apple’s
GWorld routines to ease the job of dealing with offscreen bitmaps.

Chapter9

Toolbox Techniques

When you've created the image you want, maybe by loading it from disk or by
making it a GrafPort’s bitmap and drawing into it, you can put it on the screen very

quickly by using the CopyBits procedure. By synchronizing the call to CopyBits
with a change in TickCount, you can get a smooth transition.

Like many tricky and undocumented techniques, using TickCount to tell you
when to draw hasn't held up all that well over time. In particular, this idea depends
on the fact that both the vertical retrace and the TickCount updating happen
together. Well, on any Macintosh with an external screen, like any Macintosh II or
a third-party monitor for another Macintosh, this isn’t true anymore. TickCount

still ticks 60 times per second, but monitors have different retrace rates—most of the
newer monitors update faster than the original Macintosh. This means that watching TickCount doesn’t sync you up with the retrace anymore on monitors with a

different retrace rate, so the technique won’t work.
The way around this is a little fancier. You can write a routine that can be

notified when a monitor's vertical retrace period happens. You do this using the
Vertical Retrace Manager routine SlotVInstall, which is described in volume 5 of
Inside Macintosh. Putting a routine in the monitor's vertical retrace queue will allow

you to draw when the vertical blanking period begins. It’s just a little harder than
simply waiting for TickCount to change.

Automatic window updating
When your application creates windows, the Window Manager (via the Event

Manager) lets you know whenever you should redraw part of a window, either

because the window has changed or because a part of it just became visible. When
you get an update event, you draw the update region in the specified window.
The Window Manager actually has another, simpler scheme for redrawing
windows, but it works best with windows whose contents never change. Each
window record has a field called windowPic. This field is usually not used and is set

to zero. If you can use a QuickDraw picture to redraw the window, though, you can
put the picture’s handle in the windowPic field.
When the Window Manager sees a window that has to be updated, it checks to
see if the window record has zero in its windowPic field. If so, it creates an update

event; but if the field is not zero, the Window Manager uses the field as a handle to
a picture and draws the picture.

Obviously, this isn’t useful for all kinds of windows, but if you have some
windows whose appearance doesn’t change often (or ever), you can make your
program simpler by using this technique. Windows with nonzero windowPic

fields never get update events, since the Window Manager handles the updating
by just drawing the picture. The program in Listing 9-2 demonstrates this technique.

283

204

PART THREE

TIPS, TRICKS, AND TECHNIQUES

program Showoff;

{

listing

9-2.p

windowPic

example}

Memtypes,

QuickDraw,

OSIntf,

uses

ToolIntf, PackIntf;

const

appleID =

128;

fileID

=

129;

editID

=

130;

windowID=

131;

appleM = 1;
fileM
= 2;
editM

=

{resource IDs/menu

IDs

for Apple,

{index for each menu in myMenus

File and Edit menus}

(array of menu handles)
}

3;

windowM= 4;
menuCount =

4;

{total number of menus}

aboutItem =

1;

{item in Apple menu}
{Items

in Edit menu}

{items

in File menu}

{items

in Window menu}

undoItem

=

1;

cutItem

=

3;

copyItem

=

4;

pasteItem

=

5;

clearItem =

6;

newItem =

1;

closeItem =

quitItem =

3;

5;

textItem =

1;

pictItem =

2;

wName =

‘Window

windDX =

25;

windDY =

25;

leftEdge
topEdge

=
=

10;
42;

rightEdge

=

175;

picResID =

{prefix

for window names}

{distance to move

botEdge

=

';

210;

-15968;

{initial

dimensions

for new windows}

of window}

Chapter9

Toolbox Techniques

Listing

9-2.p.

285

continued

var

myMenus:

array

dragRect:

[1..menuCount]

Rect;

OF

MenuHandle;

{rectangle

{handles

used

to

to mark

the

menus}

boundaries

for

dragging window}
txRect:

textH:

Rect;

theChar:

{handle

char;

{typed

to

for

{true

if

user

is

doneFlag:

boolean;

{true

if

user

has

EventRecord;

wRecord:

WindowRecord;

myWindow:

WindowPtr;

myWinPeek

:

nextWRect:

nextWNum:

set

WindowPtr;

window}

Shift-clicking}
chosen

about

about

an

the

Quit

Item}

event}

application window}

{another pointer

to wRecord}

{window in which mouse button was

Str255;

{portRect

for

{title

next window to

of

{number

GrafPtr;

of

{pointer

boolean;

{for

next

window

next window

to

to

pressed}

be

opended}

be

opened}

(for

title)}

preserve GrafPort}

disabling menu

items}

Longint;

scrCopyErr:

procedure

{information

Longint;

scrapErr:

application

{pointer to wRecord}

Rect;

savedPort:
menusOK:

{information

WindowPeek;

nextWTitle:

in

character}

boolean;

myEvent:

text

Textedit record}

extended:

whichWindow:

{

{rectangle

TEHandle;

Integer;

SetUpMenus;

up menus

and menu

bar

}

var

i:

Integer;

begin
myMenus[appleM]

:=

GetMenu(appleID);

myMenus[fileM]

:= GetMenu(fileID);

{read file menu}

myMenus[editM]

:= GetMenu(editID);

{read Edit menu}

for

i:=l1

:= GetMenu

names}

to menuCount do

DrawMenuBar;

{

{install

and draw menu

menus

in menu bar

}

bar}

{SetUpMenus}

procedure

Open

accessory

(windowID);

InsertMenu(myMenus[i],0);
end;

desk

menu}

{add

myMenus[windowM]

{

{read Apple

AddResMenu(myMenus[appleM],’DRVR’);

a

OpenWindow;

new window

}

begin

NumToString
nextWTitle

myWindow
SetPort

(-1),

nextWTitle);

(wName,

{prepare

nextWTitle);

(Nil,

nextWRect,

0);

{open

True,

(myWindow);

number

{add

to

nextWTitle,

for

title}

prefix}

True,

noGrowDocProc,

the window}

{make

it

the

current port}

:= thePort”.portRect; {prepare TERecord for new window}

InsetRect
textH

concat

:= NewWindow

Pointer

txRect

(nextWNum,
:=

:=

(txRect,
TENew

4,

0);

(txRect,

txRect);

286

PART THREE

TIPS, TRICKS, AND TECHNIQUES

~

Listing 9-2.p.

CheckItem

(myMenus

CheckItem
myWinPeek

(myMenus [windowM], pictItem,
:= WindowPeek (myWindow);

[windowM],

textItem,

myWinPeek*.refcon := Longint (textH);

continued

true);

false);

{keep TEHandle in refcon!}

OffsetRect (nextWRect, windDX, windDY);{move window down and right}
if nextWRect.right > dragRect.right
{move back if it’s too far over}
then OffsetRect (nextWRect, -nextWRect.left + leftEdge, 0);
if nextWRect.bottom >
then OffsetRect
nextWNum
menusOK

:= nextWNum +
:=

1;

0,

-nextWRect.top + topEdge);

{bump number

for next window}

false;

EnableItem
end;

dragRect.bottom

(nextWRect,

(myMenus

[editM],0);

{in case this

is

the only window}

{OpenWindow}

procedure KillWindow

(theWindow:

WindowPtr);

{Close a window and throw everything away}
begin

TEDispose

(TEHandle

(WindowPeek (theWindow)”.refcon)
);
{throw away TERecord}

DisposeWindow
textH

if

(theWindow);

{throw away WindowRecord}

:= NIL;

{for TEIdle

FrontWindow = NIL

{if

in main

no more windows,

event

then

begin
DisableItem

(myMenus[fileM],

DisableItem

(myMenus[windowM],

end;

closeItem);
0);

{then}

if WindowPeek (FrontWindow)*.windowKind < 0
{desk acc

coming up,

enable undo}

then

begin
EnableItem

DisableItem

(myMenus[editM],

(myMenus

undolItem);

[windowM],

0);

end
else
end;

DisableItem

(myMenus[editM],

undoItem);

{KillWindow}

function MyFilter

var

(theDialog:

itemHit:

Integer):

var

theType:

Integer;

theItem:

Handle;

theBox:

Rect;

finalTicks:

Longint;

DialogPtr;

Boolean;

var theEvent:

loop}

disable Close}

EventRecord;

Chapter9

Toolbox Techniques

Listing 9-2.p.

287

continued

begin

if

(BitAnd(theEvent.message,charCodeMask) = 13) {carriage return}
or (BitAnd(theEvent.message,charCodeMask) = 3) {enter}
then

begin

;
GetDItem (theDialog, 1, theType, theItem, theBox)
HiliteControl (ControlHandle (theItem), 1);
;
Delay (8, finalTicks)
HiliteControl (ControlHandle (theItem), 0);
itemHit

MyFilter

:= 1;
:= True;

end {if BitAnd...then begin}
else MyFilter

end;

:= False;

{function MyFilter}

procedure DoAboutBox;
var

itemHit:

Integer;

begin

myWindow := GetNewDialog (1000, Nil, pointer (-1));
repeat

ModalDialog (@MyFilter, itemHit)

until itemHit = 1;
;
DisposDialog (myWindow)
end; {procedure DoAboutBox}

procedure DoPicScrap (command:

Integer);

var

thePicHandle:

Handle;

begin

{command is ignored for now -- always acts like Copy}

scrapErr

:= ZeroScrap;

);
thePicHandle := Handle (GetWindowPic (FrontWindow)
HLock

(thePicHandle);

scrapErr := PutScrap(GetHandleSize(thePicHandle), ‘PICT’,thePicHandle”) ;

HUnlock

end;

(thePicHandle);

{procedure DoPicScrap}

procedure DoCommand

(mResult:

LONGINT);

{Execute Item specified by mResult, the result of MenuSelect}

288

PART THREE

TIPS, TRICKS, AND TECHNIQUES

Listing

9-2.p.

continued

var

theItem:

Integer;

{menu

item number

theMenu:

Integer;

{menu

number

name:

Str255;

temp:

Integer;

{desk

from mResult

from mResult

accessory

low-order word}

high-order word}

name}

begin
theItem

:=

theMenu

:= HiWord(mResult);

case

LoWord(mResult);

theMenu

{call

Toolbox Utility

{

of

menu

{case

routines

to

set

}

item number and menu number}
on menu

ID}

appleID:

if

theItem = aboutItem
then

DoAboutBox

else

begin
GetItem(myMenus[appleM],theItem,
name) ;
{GetPort

(savedPort);}

scrapErr

:=

scrCopyErr

temp

TEToScrap;

:= OpenDeskAcc (name);

EnableItem
{SetPort

if

ZeroScrap;

:=

(myMenus

[editM]},0);

(savedPort)
;}

FrontWindow <> NIL
then

begin
EnableItem

(myMenus

[fileM],

closeItem);

EnableItem

(myMenus

[editM],

undoItem);

end;
menusOK

end;

{if

:=

{if

FrontWindow then begin}

false;

theItem...else begin}

fileID:
case

theItem of

newlitem:

OpenWindow;
closeItem:

if WindowPeek (FrontWindow)*.windowKind < 0
then CloseDeskAcc
{if desk acc window,
else KillWindow
{if

it’s one

(windowPeek
close it}

(FrontWindow)
;

of mine,

blow it

quitItem:
doneFlag
end;

{case

:= TRUE;

theItem}

(FrontWindow)”~.windowKind)

{quit}

away}

Chapter9

Toolbox Techniques

Listing 9-2.p.

289

continued

editID:

begin

if

not SystemEdit(theItem-1)
then

case theItem of

{case on menu item number}

cutiItem:

if GetWindowPic

(FrontWindow)

then TECut(textH)
else DoPicScrap

= Nil

{call TextEdit to handle

(cutiItem);

copyitem:

if GetWindowPic

(FrontWindow)

= Nil

then TECopy(textH)

else DoPicScrap

(copyItem);

if GetWindowPic

(FrontWindow)

i]

pastelItem:

Nil

else DoPicScrap

(pasteItem)

=e

then TEPaste(textH)

if GetWindowPic

(FrontWindow)

ll

clearItem:
Nil

then TEDelete(textH)

else DoPicScrap

(clearItem)
;

{case theItem}
end;
{editID begin}

end;
windowID:

case theItem of
textItem:

begin

CheckItem (myMenus [(windowM], textItem, true);
CheckItem (myMenus [windowM], pictItem, false);
SetWindowPic (FrontWindow, Nil);
textH := TEHandle (GetWRefCon (FrontWindow)
);

InvalRect (thePort”.portRect);

end;

{textItem case}

pictiItem:

begin

CheckItem (myMenus [windowM], textItem, false);
CheckItem (myMenus [windowM], pictItem, true);
SetWindowPic (FrontWindow, GetPicture (picResIqd)
);
textH

:= Nil;

EraseRect (thePort”’.portRect);
InvalRect (thePort”.portRect);
end;
end;

{pictItem case}

{case theItem}

Item}

290

PART THREE

TIPS, TRICKS, AND TECHNIQUES

>

Listing 9-2.p.
end;

{case

theMenu}

HiliteMenu(0);
end;

{DoCommand}

procedure FixCursor;
var

mouseLoc:

point;

begin
GetMouse

(mouseLoc);

if PtInRect (mouseLoc, thePort”.portRect )

then SetCursor (GetCursor (iBeamCursor)””)
else

end;

SetCursor

(arrow);

{procedure FixCursor}

begin

{main program}

InitGraf(@thePort);
InitFonts;
FlushEvents(everyEvent,0);

InitWindows;
InitMenus;
TEInit;

InitDialogs(NIL);
InitCursor;
SetUpMenus;

with screenBits.bounds do
SetRect (dragRect,4,24,right-4,bottom-4)
;
doneFlag
menusOK

:=

nextWNum

SetRect

:=

false;

false;

:=

1;

{initialize window number}

(nextWRect, leftEdge, topEdge, rightEdge,botEdge)
;
{initialize window rectangle}

OpenWindow;
{

Main event

{start with one

loop

open window}

}

repeat

SystemTask;

if

FrontWindow <>

NIL

then

if WindowPeek (FrontWindow)*.windowKind >= 0
then

FixCursor;

continued

Chapter9

Toolbox Techniques

291

Listing 9-2.p. continued
if not menusOK and

(FrontWindow = NIL)

then

begin

DisableItem

(myMenus

[fileM],

closeItem);

DisableItem

(myMenus

[editM],

0);

menusOK

end;

:=

true;

{if FrontWindow...then begin}

if textH <> Nil
then

if

TEIdle(textH);

GetNextEvent(everyEvent ,myEvent)
then

case myEvent.what of
mouseDown:

case FindWindow(myEvent.where,whichWindow) of
inSysWindow:

;
SystemClick(myEvent,whichWindow)
inMenuBar:

DoCommand (MenuSelect (myEvent.where) );
inDrag:

DragWindow(whichWindow,myEvent.where,dragRect)
;
inContent:
begin

if whichWindow <> FrontWindow

then SelectWindow(whichWindow)

else if GetWindowPic

(whichWindow)

= Nil then

begin

GlobalToLocal(myEvent.where)
;

extended := BitAnd(myEvent.modifiers,shiftKey)
TEClick(myEvent.where,extended,textH)
;

end;
end;

{if}

{inContent}

inGoAway:

if TrackGoAway (whichWindow, myEvent.where)
then KillWindow (whichWindow);
end;
keyDown,

{case FindWindow}
autoKey:

begin

theChar

);
:= CHR(BitAnd(myEvent.message,charCodeMask)

if BitAnd(myEvent.modifiers,cmdKey)
)
then DoCommand(MenuKey(theChar)
else

<> 0

<> 0;

|

TIPS, TRICKS, AND TECHNIQUES

PART THREE

292,

Listing 9-2.p.

continued

(FrontWindow) = Nil

if GetWindowPic

;
then TEKey(theChar,textH)

{keyDown,

end;

autoKey begin}

activateEvt:
begin

if BitAnd(myEvent.modifiers,activeFlag) <> 0
{application window is becoming active}
then
begin

if GetWindowPic (WindowPtr (myEvent.message)) = Nil

then begin

textH

:= TEHandle

(WindowPeek

(myEvent.message)”~.refcon);

TEActivate(textH);
{then}

end;

)
);
SetPort (GrafPtr (myEvent.message
EnableItem (myMenus[fileM],closeItem);
;
DisableItem(myMenus[editM],undoItem)

if WindowPeek (FrontWindow)”~.nextWindow .windowKind < 0
then

end

else

scrCopyErr

:= TEFromScrap;

{if BitAnd...then begin}

{application window is becoming inactive}

begin

if GetWindowPic

(WindowPtr (myEvent.message))

= Nil

then TEDeactivate (TEHandle(WindowPeek

(myEvent.message)”~.refcon) );
if WindowPeek (FrontWindow)*.windowKind < 0
then

begin

EnableItem

if GetWindowPic

(myMenus[editM],

(WindowPtr

undoItem);

(myEvent.message))

then begin
scrapErr

:=

scrCopyErr

end;

ZeroScrap;
:=

TEToScrap;

{then}

end {if WindowPeek...then begin}
else DisableItem (myMenus[editM], undoItem);
{else begin}
end;
{activateEvt begin}

end;
updateEvt:

begin
GetPort

(savedPort);

SetPort

(GrafPtr

(myEvent.message)
);

BeginUpdate(WindowPtr(myEvent.message)
);

EraseRect (WindowPtr(myEvent .message)”.portRect);
TEUpdate (WindowPtr(myEvent.message)”.portRect,
TEHandle(WindowPeek(myEvent .message)*.refcon) );
EndUpdate(WindowPtr(myEvent.message)
);
SetPort

end;
end;
until

L

end.

(savedPort);

{updateEvt begin}

{case myEvent.what}

doneFlag;

= Nil

Chapter 9

Toolbox Techniques

Listing 9-2.r.

/*

listing 9-2.r */

#include Types.r
resource

‘MENU’

(128)

{

128,
textMenuProc,

Ox7FFFFFFD,
enabled,

apple,
{

About WindowPic...,

-~,

noIcon,

noKey,

noIcon,

noMark,

noKey,

plain

3
resource

‘MENU’

(129)

{

129,
textMenuProc,

Ox7FFFFFF7,

enabled,

File,

{

New, noIcon, N, noMark, plain,
-, noIcon, noKey, noMark, plain,

Close, noIcon, W, noMark, plain,
-, noIcon, noKey, noMark, plain,
Quit, noIcon, Q, noMark, plain

};
resource

‘MENU’

(130)

{

130,
textMenuProc,

Ox7FFFFFFC,

enabled,

Edit,

{

Undo, noIcon, Z, noMark, plain,
-, noIcon, noKey, noMark, plain,
Cut, noIcon, X, noMark, plain,
Copy, noIcon, C, noMark, plain,
Paste, noIcon, V, noMark, plain,
Clear, noIcon,

noKey,

};
resource

‘MENU’

(131)

131,
textMenuProc,

allEnabled,

enabled,
Window,

{

noMark,

plain

noMark,

plain,

293

294.

PART THREE

TIPS, TRICKS, AND TECHNIQUES

(

Listing 9-2.r. continued
{
Text, noIcon, noKey, noMark, plain,
Picture, noIcon, noKey, noMark, plain

};

}

resource

{

‘DITL’
{61,

(1000,

191,

Button

81,

About

box)

{

251},

{

enabled,
OK

by

{8,

24,

56,

272},

StaticText {
disabled,

WindowPic example program\nby Scott Knaster
\nversion 1.0 12/12/91

}y

}

}

resource

'DLOG’

{62,

100,

(1000,

148,

About

box)

{

412},

dBoxProc,

visible,
goAway,

0x0,
1000,

New Dialog

si
data

‘PICT’

(-15968)

{

$02

1F 00 BO

00

70

00 Fc 00 EC

11

01

O01

00

OA O0/*

...~.p..........

*/

$BO

00

70

00

FC

00

EC

98

00

00

BO

00

70

00

D8/*

~.p....6...%.p.y

*/

$00

FO

00

BO

00

70

00

D8

00 EC

00 BO

00

70

00

D8/*

...%.p.¥...~%.p.y

*/

$00 EC 00

00

02 Fi

00

02 Fi 00

02 F1

00 02 Fl

OO/*

............. ee

*/

10

$02

Fl

00

02

Fl

00

02

F1

00

02

F1

00

02

F1

00

02/*

................

*/

$F1

00

02

F1

00

02

F1

00

06

02

00

00

78

F4

00

06/*

.........4..K...

¥*/

$02
$00
$00

00 00 FF F4
00 FF CO F5
00 01 FO F5

00
00
00

07 03 00 00 FF 80 F5 00 07 03/*
07 03 00 00 6F EO F5 00 07 03/*
06 FE 00 00 F8 FS 00 06 FE 00/*

.......... Aw...
...2....-.. O.....
.....c
cece ew eens

*/
*/
*/

$00

7C F5

00

06

FE

00

00

3E

F5

00

06

FE

00

00

1F/*

.|...... DPrececes

*/

SF6

00

07

FE

00

01

03

EO

F6

00

07

FE

00

O1

O1

FO/*

1...
ccc cee ee eee

*/

SF6

00

06 FD 00

00 F8 F6

00

06 FD 00

00 7C F6

OO/*

......ceeeees |...

*/

$06

$00 01 OF 80 F7 00 07 FD 00 01 07 CO F7 00 O07 FD/*

FD 00

FD

00

...A....... é....

$00
$00

01 03 EO F7
00 F8 F7 00

..cccccccccccees */
.........|/...... * /

SF5 00 07 FE 00 01 OF 80 F6 00 07 FE 00 O1 07 CO/*

00

3E F6

00

06

00 07 FD 00
06 FC 00 00

00

1F F6

00

07

FD/*

O1 O1 FO F7 00 06 FC/*
7C F7 00 06 FC 00 OO/*

....... Biwseees é */

....>.c

cece

ceee

*/

*/

Chapter9

295

Toolbox Techniques

~

Listing

9-2.r. continued

$3E F7 00 06 FC 00 00 1F F7 00 07 FC 00 O1 OF 80/* >.......c
ce eeee A */
SF8

00

CO F8

00

98

00

00

D8

OO/*

....... 2..0..-9.

*/

$70
$70

00 FC 00 FO 00 D8
00 FC 00 EC 00 00

07

00
07

70
FC

00
00

FC
01

00 EC 00
03 EO F8

D8
00

00/*
07/*

p..... Y.Deweee y.
p..w..wcccccvceces

*/
x/

SFC

00

06

FB

00

00

F8 F8

01

FC

00

01

06 FB/*

.... ccc cece we eee

*/

..|...... Peeeeee

*/

S1F F8

O7/*

........ Cece cece

*/

03 7F FF FF F8/*
18 FE 00 09 F8/*

..... E. Aree
ce eee
J...
ccc ewww A.

*/
*/

07

FB 00

00

10

$00 00 7C F8 00 06 FB 00 00 3E F8 00 06 FB 00 00/*
00

01 FO F8

07

01

OF CO F9

00

O07

FB

00
00

01

SFC F9 00 09 FB 00 03 03 FF FF 80 FB 00 OA FB 00/* ...A...... A...ee
$00 01 FE FF 00 CO FC 00 09 FA 00
SFC 00 OB FA 00 05 07 FF FF FE 00

*/

$00 03 FF FF 80 3C FE 00 08 F7 00 02 7F EO 3C FE/* ....A<........ <. */
$00
SFC
SFC
$00
$02
SF1

08
FE
FE
02
Fl
00

F7 00 02 OF FC
00 07 F6 00 01
00 07 F6 00 01
Fl 00 02 Fl 00
00 02 F1 00 02
02 Fl 00 02 Fl

3C
FF
07
02
Fl
00

FE
FC
F8
Fl
00
02

00
FE
FE
00
02
Fl

08 F7 00 02 03
00 07 F6 00 01
00 02 Fl 00 02
02 Fl 00 02 F1
Fl 00 02 Fl 00
00 02 Fl 00 FF

FF/*
3F/*
FI/*
OO/*
O02/*
/*

....... Sec ccceee * /
...ce cece cece ee 2? */
wi... cece cee eeee * /
2... cee cee eee */
J... ee eee eee eee * /
.uceccccccccees */};

Using the refCon for data. Each window record includes a Longint field
called refCon. This field is left alone by the system. It’s intended for whatever
the application programmer wants to do with it. Often a window will have
some data associated with it; for example, many programs associate TextEdit
records with open windows. Although
the refCon is declared as a Longint, it’s
no accident that the size of a Longint (4 bytes) is also the size of a handle. If
your window has data associated with it, a good technique is to put the
associated data together as a relocatable heap block (created by calling
NewHandle) and to stash the handle in the window’s refCon. You can do this
in MPW Pascal through the magic of explicit type coercion.

TextEdit hooks
The TextEdit routines are really handy for doing text entry and editing on a small
to medium scale within applications. Usually, when a tougher text editing job is at
hand, many programmers will abandon TextEdit entirely and cook up their own
text-editing package.

Although this isn’t always a bad idea, since TextEdit was designed for fairly
simple tasks, it’s got a lot of neat hooks that can be used to customize it and modify
its behavior in various ways. All these hooks are pretty thoroughly documented,

296

PART THREE

TIPS, TRICKS, AND TECHNIQUES

but not a lot of programs use them. This section will give you an idea of some of the
fancy things you can do with TextEdit.
The first interesting TextEdit hook is called highHook. This hook is a field in
each TextEdit record. The highHook field gives you a chance to customize the way
TextEdit highlights a selection in that record. Usually, TextEdit just calls InvertRect
to highlight a selection, causing the familiar white-on-black look. Let’s say you're

tired of that, and you want some sort of different appearance: maybe you want the
selection enclosed in a box or underlined, or maybe you want the Macintosh to
speak the selection with some voice-synthesis software.
The highHook field allows you to change the highlighting to anything you
want. If you install the address of a routine in a TextEdit record’s highHook field,

that routine will be called whenever TextEdit is asked to highlight a selection.
When the routine is called, it has access to the TextEdit record and the rectangle
that encloses the selection, so it can do whatever it wants.

Mostly for assembly language.

Most of the TextEdit hooks provide infor-

mation in registers rather than on the stack. For example, the highHook

routine is passed a pointer to the TextEdit record in register A3, and teSel-

Rect(A3) holds the rectangle to be highlighted. This means that it’s fairly

difficult to get this information from a high-level language routine.

Another TextEdit hook, called caretHook, is similar to highHook. The caretHook field allows you to change the way the caret (the insertion point) is drawn.
Normally, of course, TextEdit simply calls InvertRect on a one-pixel wide rectangle

that is the insertion point. This makes the caret blink.
Let's say you're tired of blinking insertion points and you'd rather have a
nonblinking insertion point, or one that flashes from top to bottom like a marquee,

or maybe a little pointer sticking between the characters, or something else that you
think of. You can do this with caretHook. If you install a pointer to a routine in the
caretHook field of a TextEdit record, the ROM will call you whenever it wants to
make the insertion point blink. You can then do whatever you want. Once again,
register A3 will contain a pointer to the textEdit record.

When you double-click in text, TextEdit selects a word. TextEdit has a fairly
simple definition of a word: it’s anything that’s surrounded by spaces or nonprinting characters (those with ASCII values less than $20). This definition of a word is

also used for figuring out how to do word wrapping at the end of a line.
Sometimes you may want to define a word as something more sophisticated.
For example, you may have an application in which you want to define hyphenated words as single words, or you may want double-clicks to select words and a

Chapter9

Toolbox Techniques

comma or period that follows them. You can do these things by using the word-

Break hook in the TextEdit record.
When you install a routine in the wordBreak field, TextEdit will call you whenever it has to decide whether something is a word, either for a double-click or for
word wrap. When you're called, TextEdit tells you the text that it’s looking at and
the character position that it’s considering for the word break. You get to tell it
whether you want to put a word break at that position or not.

Resuming from system errors
A lot of this book is dedicated to helping you prevent your innocent users from ever

seeing their Macintosh blow up with the dreaded system error alert. By understanding how your program works, testing it thoroughly, and debugging it, you'll

greatly reduce the chances of your application dying with a system error.
However, even if you’re really smart and very clever, you still might miss
something and your program may crash. There’s nothing more frustrating than
losing work because you hadn’t saved something before a crash. You may even
have experienced this catastrophe yourself.
Sometimes, when a system error occurs, the system is in pretty sad shape. As

we ve already discussed, the heap and the stack may have been randomly trashed,
the system globals may be invalid, and your program’s code may have been over-

written. Often, though, things aren’t all that bad. It may just be that you’ve
attempted to dereference a handle that’s been disposed of or maybe you passed a
bad parameter to a ROM routine. It’s possible that the system error actually caught
the first sign of bad tidings and that the heap and stack are still reasonably valid.

Since there’s a chance that the system is not completely broken when a system
error occurs, there’s also a chance that the user's data is intact. For example, if the

user has been entering text into a word-processing document, it might still be
readable even after a system error. It sure would be nice if you could save some of
the document that the poor user has worked so hard on. Is there any way to do this?
Of course there is! On the Macintosh, there are ways to do all sorts of things,
including recover from system errors. Almost every application calls InitDialogs

(Nil) without the programmer thinking much about it. The parameter to InitDialogs is kind of out of place—it’s actually more related to the System Error Handler
than to the Dialog Manager. If you pass a pointer to a procedure in this field and a
system error occurs while your program is running, the system error alert will have
its Resume button enabled. If the user clicks it, the routine that you pointed to

when you called InitDialogs will be called by the System Error Handler.
Once your procedure is called, you can try to do the user a favor, such as saving
the document. If you succeed, as you have a reasonable chance of doing, you'll

probably make the user very happy. Of course, there are a zillion things that could
go wrong. Since a system error has occurred, all bets are off. There’s no guarantee

that your resume procedure itself hasn’t been demolished by runaway code. It’s

297

298

PART THREE

TIPS, TRICKS, AND TECHNIQUES

even possible that your saving the document to the disk will damage things that are
already saved on that disk.

Given all this, what can you possibly do to help the user in your resume
procedure? One thing you can dois write a procedure that, requiring as little of the
Operating System as possible, writes the user’s document out to disk in some form.
If it’s a word-processing document, you might just mass-write it to disk and then
worry about interpreting it after the user has restarted.
One more thing to remember about your resume procedure’s efforts to save

something to disk is this: if the system is broken in just the right way, you could
clobber other stuff that’s already on the disk you're saving to. Because of this, it’s a
good idea to ask the user to insert a disk that’s blank or not valuable before you try

to save. For this reason, it’s a really good idea not to allow the attempted save to be
to a hard disk.
Although trying to accomplish something useful after a system error has

occurred is very tricky, it’s sure nice at least to give the user the option. If you
implement a resume routine, remember this important fact: the system is broken,

maybe severely, maybe not. This means that you should try to do as little as possible: just try to save the user’s work without making much fuss, and then have the
user return to the Finder, if possible, and restart the Macintosh.
A good philosophy for resume procedures is “do it yourself.” In other words,
rely on the system as little as possible. If you want to ask the user a question, don’t

call GetNewDialog. Just call QuickDraw directly to draw the dialog. At this point,
neatness doesn’t count. You should also watch the mouse button yourself; don’t

rely on the Control Manager or the event queue.
Pulling off some kind of save from a system error is one Macintosh problem

that hasn't been solved by many applications. If you're looking for a real challenge,
this may be it. If you design a useful, reasonably safe resume procedure that saves
the user from disaster even once, you may be eligible for a medal, or at least large
cash rewards from the person whose data you saved.

Chapter9

Toolbox Techniques

Things to remember

¢ By observing some restrictions, you can use a high-level language to write

a definition function, such as a window definition or menu definition.
e You can use the system global called ResErrProc to cause a procedure to be

called automatically when a Resource Manager error occurs.
e When moving a resource from one file to another, you must watch out for
several things, including making sure that the destination file does not
already contain a resource of the type and ID that you’re copying.

e You can get some reasonably flicker-free drawing by simply looping until
the vertical blanking period begins.

e The Window Manager defines a method for automatically updating windows by drawing pictures, instead of generating update events.

e TextEdit contains lots of hooks that you can grab onto to enhance its capabilities.

e There’s a hook in the System Error Handler that allows you to try to take
some last-ditch action after a system error has occurred.

299

CHAPTER

10

Operating System Techniques
In this chapter, we'll discuss some tricks you can do with the Operating System.

We'll talk about the File Manager, how ROM calls really work, and other things.

How ROM calls work
All personal computers provide some sort of operating system service routines that
can be called by programmers. At the very least, these routines include creating,
opening, closing, reading, and writing files. Most provide a lot more. There’s probably no personal computer that has more callable routines than the Macintosh. As
of System 7, there were over 1,500 routines—how many can you name?
One problem with having callable routines is that the computer's operating
system is probably going to change. Even on the Macintosh, which has most of its
callable routines in ROM, changes happen. Sometimes these changes require a
whole new ROM; but changing the system routines can be as simple as using anew
system disk that applies patches to the ROM. Since there are application programs
depending on an unchanging ROM, the changers of the system have to be very
careful.

On some systems, when applications call the operating system, they do so by
jumping directly to an address in RAM or ROM. Obviously, this is a severe limitation on changes to the system; routines have to be in exactly the same place or the
applications won’t work any more.

The Macintosh uses a nifty scheme that doesn’t have this problem to make its
ROM calls. On the Macintosh, all ROM calls are single 68000 instructions. It works

like this: when the microprocessor sees an instruction that begins with the hex

301

302

PART THREE

TIPS, TRICKS, AND TECHNIQUES

digit A, it immediately realizes that it doesn’t want the instruction. Instead, it
creates a 68000 exception and jumps to a routine whose address is stored at location
$28. This address is called an exception vector, and it’s intended for just this
purpose: taking control when an instruction starting with A is encountered.
The Macintosh ROM hooks itself into this vector when the system starts up.

When the CPU encounters an A instruction, it winds up in the ROM, running a
routine called the trap dispatcher. The trap dispatcher takes the A instruction and,
by looking at the remaining part of the word, determines which ROM routine is

being called. It gets the address of the ROM routine from a table of addresses kept
in the low memory global area.

After the trap dispatcher determines the address of the routine to be called, it
simply jumps (JSRs, actually) to that location. This way, the application doesn’t
have to know where in the ROM the system routines are—it just calls things with
an A instruction. The trap dispatcher figures out where the routine really is.
The beauty of this scheme is that Apple can move routines around in the ROM
all it wants. As long as the system sets up the trap dispatch table correctly when it
starts up, applications don’t have to care about the location of routines that they’re

calling. This helps ease compatibility as new and wonderful ROMs are made.

Speed freaks.

Those ofyou inclined to optimize your code for speed will no

doubt figure out that this trap- dispatching business takes time. If you’re
calling a ROM routine over and over in a loop, you may wish you knew the
actual address ofthe routine in ROM so you could JSR to it,-which would be

~ much faster than calling it via a trap.

_ The Macintoshactually provides you a way to do thislegally. There’s a

ROM call that willgive you the absolute address of any callin the ROM. This

call, GetTrapAddress, takes a ROM call number as a parameter and returns

the address of that call. If you call GetTrapAddress once to find out the

location of the call you want, you can then JSR to it all day long, and it will

work fine. As long as you call GetTrapAddressin your application, you'll be

OK, since Apple guarantees that the ROM will not change while your appli-

cationis running.

Random access file I/O
Most high-level language programmers are used to high-level, random access file

YO. This is a set of functions that allows access to logical records withina file. In
Pascal, this is usually implemented with the reset and rewrite statements, which

Chapter10

Operating System Techniques

opena file; seek, which finds a specified record in the file; and put and get, which

store and retrieve the file’s records.
Most Macintosh languages provide libraries that implement these functions or

something like them. These libraries provide code that’s linked to your application.
The code makes calls to the Macintosh File Manager in ROM to implement its

functions.
Although you can use a language’s library routines for random access file I/O,
you should consider making direct calls to the File Manager yourself. The advantage to calling the ROM directly is better management of exactly what's going on

when you work with files. If you make the calls directly to the File Manager, your

code will probably run faster, since you won't be going through a “middleman.”

Random access? “Random access” is an interesting term here. It seems to
suggest that no matter what record you ask for,you'll get a random one. Some

code actually works this way (unintendedby the programmer, of course).
Some people prefer the term “direct access.’

Coe

If making direct calls to the File Manager is so great, why doesn’t everyone do
it? One reason is convenience: high-level language programmers know how to use

the language’s file I/O instructions, and they’re easy to use. Most programmers will
stick with the familiar, comfortable way of doing things.

Doing file I/O by calling the File Manager directly isn’t that hard. In this section
we'll discuss the basic algorithms for this technique. Each high-level language
statement, such as reset, get, and put, can be simulated with a File Manager call.
The first thing to do to create a random access file is to declare the data type that

you
ll be using for things in the file. In Pascal, this is usually a record; in C, it’s a
struct. We'll use Pascal for our example here. Let's say we want each item in our file
to consist of two integers, a Boolean and a long integer. The declaration would look
something like this:
type

MemberRecord

=

Record

height,

weight:

active:

Boolean;

idNum:
end;

Integer;

Longint;

{myRecord}

This type will be used for records that go into the files. To maintain flexibility,

we'll keep each record in the heap. That will allow us to dynamically create as many
as we need during the execution of the program. Since these records will be heap

303

304

PART THREE

TIPS, TRICKS, AND TECHNIQUES

blocks, we should make them relocatable so that they won’t cause fragmentation.
That means we'll need a couple more declarations:
type

MemberPtr = “MemberRecord;
MemberHdl = “MemberPtr;
var

thisMemberHdl:

MemberHdl;

Declaring these types simply gives us a way to manage the records as relocatable
heap blocks.

Now we can use the statement

thisMemberHdl

:= MemberHdl(NewHandle

(sizeOf(MemberRecord)
) )

to create a new record in the heap. Let's discuss each part of this statement. The

sizeOf function is a handy Pascal built-in function that returns the size of any type
or variable.

NewHandle, of course, creates a new relocatable heap block. The Mem-

berHd1 in front of the NewHandle call is an explicit type coercion; it makes the
compiler happy, since NewHandle returns a variable of type Handle that you
cannot directly assign to the variable on the left—its type is MemberHandle (if this
is puzzling you, see the section How to Get around Pascal’s Type Checking in
Chapter 8 for more on how it works).
Now we've created a relocatable heap block that’s big enough to hold one of

our records, and thisMemberHd1 is a handle to that block. We can fill in the fields of
this record with standard assignment statements, like this:
with thisMemberHdl”* do
begin

height

:=

weight

:= 210;

active
idNum
end;

73;

:= true;
:=

5346633;

{with}

This with is OK.

Remember from the section in Chapter 2 on implicit
dereferencing that this type of with statement is dangerous, but only if there

are any statements in the body of the with that can cause compaction. Since
there aren’t any here, we’re OK. You can look at Chapter 2 for a refresher
course.

Chapter10

Operating System Techniques

Next we need to create the file on disk. To do this, we use the File Manager call
HCreate. The HCreate call lets us specify the file’s name, the volume and directory
where it'll live, and its creator and type:
errCode

:=

HCreate(vRefNum,

dirID,

fileName,

creator, fileType);

Notice that HCreate is a function that returns an error code. Don’t ignore this error

code—check it (even though we've ignored it here, of course). All the File Manager

calls work this way. After we've created the file, we can open it with HOpen. We
pass HOpen the file’s name, volume, directory, and file permission, and it returns
a reference number, which is what we use to refer to a file while it’s open:
errCode

:= HOpen

(vRefNum,

dirID,

fileName,

permission,

RefNum);

Whena file is open, the File Manager remembers the current position in the file.
This position is called the mark. Perhaps you know someone named Mark. In any

case, when you read from the file, you read data starting at the mark; when you
write to file, the data you write is put into the file starting at the mark. A newly

opened file has its mark set at the beginning of the file.
To write out the record we've filled in, we'll use the

FSWrite call, which takes

a reference number, a value telling how many bytes to write, and a pointer to the
data to be written. The setup and call will look like this:
count

:=

sizeOf

(MemberRecord);

errCode := FSWrite (fileRefNum, count, thisMemberHdl”*);

This code will write to the file specified by fileRefNum, which we got in the
HCreate call. Since

FSWrite requires a pointer to the data that’s being written, we

dereference thisMemberHd by putting a ~ after it; thisMemberHd1 is a handle to
the record, so thisMemberHd1" is a pointer to the data. The number of bytes written
is returned in the count parameter.

305

306

PART THREE

TIPS, TRICKS, AND TECHNIQUES

Is this dereference safe?

The expression thisMemberHdl" is a pointer to a

relocatable object. If the object moves before this pointer is used, we'll be

dead. What will happen to execute this line of code? The parameters will be
pushed on the stack; there will be a JSR to a glue routine that takes the
parameters off the stack, builds a parameter block for the Write call, and calls
the ROM. Glue for ROM routines is put in the main segment, which is always
loaded, so JSR-ing to it won't cause any new objects to be loaded. The Write

call itself in ROM doesn’t do anything to cause compaction (it’s not listed in
the Inside Macintosh list of calls that can cause compaction), so in this case this

call is safe, right? No! There’s another, extremely obscure case to consider.
That’s when the file you're writing to is on a volume that’s offline, like an
ejected floppy disk. In this case, the system will ask the user to insert the disk,

and that routine could compact memory!©
The lesson hereis that you should tend not to trust system routines to

keep memory stable, even if Inside Macintosh.says they won’t compact memory. There are two good reasons for this: first, the system is so complex and
intertwined that it’s very difficult to think of every possible path of execution,

and second, any system callis liable to change any time a new version of the

system is introduced.

After we call FSWrite, the File Manager will have advanced the mark to the end
of the new data written. We can fill up the record with new data over and over
again and write them out with more FSWrite calls.

When we want to read a record from the file, we need to position the mark
manually. We can do this with the SetFPos File Manager call. This call, which acts

kind of like Seek in Pascal or fseek in C, takes three parameters: a file reference
number, an integer indicating the positioning mode, and a long integer indicating

the offset we want. The positioning mode allows us to position the mark relative to
the beginning of the file, the end of the file, or the current mark; in other words, we
can tell the File Manager to put the mark a given number of bytes from the beginning of the file or a given number of bytes from the end of the file, or to move the
mark a given number of bytes from its current position. Usually, you'll use the

absolute positioning mode, which is called fsFromStart.
Let's say we've written 50 records to this file, and we want to read back record
number 22. SetFPos doesn’t know anything about our record; it only moves the
mark in bytes. So we have to figure out what byte in the file starts record 22. We

know that record1 starts at the first byte in the file, record 2 starts at byte sizeOf
(MemberRecord), record 3 starts at 2 * sizeOf (MemberRecord), record 4 starts at
byte 3 * sizeOf (MemberRecord), and so on. It looks like the formula for setting the

Chapter 10

Operating System Techniques

mark is (recordNumber—1) * sizeOf (MemberRecord). So, to find record 22, we
can write
errCode

:=

SetFPos

21

*

(fileRefNum,

sizeOf

fsFromStart,

(MemberRecord)
);

This will set the mark to the beginning of record 22.

Now we can read it with an

FSRead statement, like this:.
Count

:=

errCode

sizeOf

(MemberRecord);

:= FSRead (fileRefNum,

count,

thisMemberHdl’);

This call will fill up the record in the heap with the information from record 22
in the file, since we positioned the mark there with the preceding SetFPos state-

ment. Like the FSWrite call, FSRead leaves the mark positioned at the end of the last
byte it read, so we could have a sequence of FSRead statements that reads succes-

sive records from the file. If we want to modify a record that’s already in the file, we
can do so by first using SetFPOS to point at the record, reading it with FSRead,

changing the fields we want, setting the mark back to the record’s position with

SetFPos because the FSRead call automatically moved it forward, and writing out
the new data with FSWrite.
Here’s a program fragment that summarizes this technique:
program readnwrite;

type

MemberRecord

=

Record

height,

weight:

active:

Boolean;

idNum:
end;

Integer;

Longint;

{myRecord}

MemberPtr = “MemberRecord;
MemberHdl = “MemberPtr;
var

thisMemberHdl:
errCode:

fileName:

vRefNum,

MemberHdl;

OSErr;

Str255;

fileRefNum,

creator, fileType:

count:

recordNum:

Integer;

OSType;

Longint;

begin
{creating the record}

thisMemberHdl

:= MemberHdl

(NewHandle

(sizeOf

307

308

PART THREE

TIPS, TRICKS, AND TECHNIQUES

(MemberRecord)
) );

with thisMemberHdl”TM* do
begin
height

:=

73;

weight

:=

210;

active
idNum
end;

:= true;
:=

5346633;

{with}

{creating and opening the
errCode

file}

:= HCreate(vRefNum,

dirID,

fileName,

creator, fileType);

errCode

:= HOpen(vRefNum,

dirID,

fileName,

permission,

refNum);

{writing to the
count

:=

errCode

sizeOf

file}
(MemberRecord);

:= FSWrite

{assign new values

(fileRefNum,

count,

{reading record recordNum from the
errCode

:=

thisMemberHdl’);

and repeat for each record}

SetFPos

(fileRefNum,
(recordNum -

file}
fsFromStart,

1)

*

sizeOf

(MemberRecord)
);

count

:=

errCode

sizeOf

(MemberRecord);

:= FSRead

(fileRefNum,

count,

thisMemberHdl’);

{modifying record recordNum}
errCode

:=

SetFPos

(fileRefNum,

fsFromStart,

(recordNum -—-

1)

*

sizeof

(MemberRecord)
);

count

:=

errCode

sizeOf

(MemberRecord);

:= FSRead

(fileRefNum,

count,

thisMemberHdl”);

{modify record in thisMemberHdl”* with assignment
statements}

errCode

:=

SetFPos

(fileRefNum,
(recordNum -

fsFromStart,
1)

*

sizeof

(MemberRecord)
);

count

:=

errCode

sizeOf

(MemberRecord);

:= FSWrite

(fileRefNum,

count,

thisMemberHdl’);

Of course, in real life, in your application, you'd check all these error codes.
Wouldn't you?

Chapter10

Operating System Techniques

When your application ends
When your application ends, what happens? To answer this question, let’s think

about how your application was started up in the first place. Usually, applications
are started when the Finder calls Launch. The Launch call loads in CODE 1, which
is the application’s main segment, and executes the main program.

The last thing a program does is usually an RTS instruction. But where is this
RTS taking you? What’s the return address that's left on the stack at this point?
When an application is launched, the last thing the ROM does is JSR to the main

program. This JSR, which is in the Segment Loader’s Launch routine, puts a return
address on the stack that is just beyond the JSR that started the application—it’s

“on the other side of the application,” you might say.
When the application reaches its last instruction, which is an RTS, it will return

control back to the Segment Loader part of the ROM. This code takes care of

shutting down the application and automatically returning to the Finder. In fact,
the first instruction that’s executed after the application does its final RTS has a trap
entry point of its own. It’s the ExitToShell trap. This trap simply closes the current
application and returns to the Finder.

When the application does its last RTS, it expects the return address to the
ROM to be there. However, if you’ve done something really nasty in your appli-

cation that’s caused something to be pushed on the stack and never retrieved, the
Macintosh will probably bomb when it tries to quit your application, since it will try
to RTS to whatever is on the top of the stack. This is known as an unbalanced stack;
that is, the stack isn’t at the same level it was when the application started. This is
pretty hard to do from a high-level language, but it’s not hard at all from assembly
language.

If you end your application by calling ExitToShell, it won’t matter what's on
the stack. This is because calling ExitToShell explicitly doesn’t require anything at
all to be on the stack; in fact, one of the things that ExitToShell does is initialize the
stack and rebuild it for the new application that’s being launched, the Finder.
If your application bombs on the way to the Finder when you don’t call ExitToShell at the end of your application, you've probably got a stack balancing
problem. You shouldn’t rely on the ExitToShell to fix things, since the real problem
will probably show up and zap you another way. Instead, you should find the code
that’s causing the unbalanced stack and fix it.

MultiFinder. If you’re running with MultiFinder, quitting your application
is a little bit different. After your application says goodbye and does its last
RTS, the code it returns to calls ExitToShell. This means that even if your
application leaves the stack unbalanced, you'll still quit OK. The reason this
was done was to give the system software folks a chance to take control, by
patching ExitToShell, when any application ends.

309

310

PART THREE

TIPS, TRICKS, AND TECHNIQUES

Keeping things around between applications
When you double-click an application in the Finder, the Finder calls Launch in the
ROM to start up the new program. As part of the startup process, Launch reinitial-

izes the application heap zone, and everything that’s in it is lost. There are things
that have to be preserved between applications, of course. Many of these things are
keptin the system globals area. For example, the global Ticks, at $16A, is the number

of ticks (sixtieths of a second) that have elapsed since the system was started up,
and this value must be maintained even when new applications are launched.
Another area of memory that’s preserved across applications is the system
heap zone. Although the application heap is nuked when a new application is

launched, the system heap is left alone. That’s because the system heap is also filled
with things that need to be kept alive when new applications are started. For

example, the system heap contains the patches to the ROM, as well as the resource
map for the system file, which is always open.
sometimes you'll want something to stick around even when another appli-

cation is launched. You'll need this, for example, if you’re writing an application
like a debugger or a RAM disk, or anything else that you don’t want to be destroyed
when an application quits. Where can you put your code?
You can’t put it in the application heap, obviously. The system global space is
already defined, so there’s no room for it there. The apparent choice is the system

heap. If you've been a faithful follower of the Macintosh system software world,
you may recall that for years, the slick way to keep something around between

applications was to jam it in above the jump table, mainly because the system heap
was so full that it couldn’t accommodate any more guests. If you've got a copy of
the first edition of this very book gathering dust in a closet or propping up a table
leg somewhere, you can find out all about that technique.
Now, mainly because of MultiFinder, the rules have changed. Above the jump

table isn’t such a great place anymore, but the system heap has become much more
hospitable. This is because MultiFinder (and System 7) have moved the application
heap away from its old position next to the system heap, and now the system heap
will actually grow as needed to handle new requests for space. So, the recommended place for persistent code is once again the system heap, not high in memory above the jump table.
There’s an extra lesson here about living on the edge. Installing code that’s

supposed to hang around between applications is a pretty hairy thing, and there’s

no official word from Apple on how to do it. The technique has changed drastically
over the years, and may change again. Whatever you do, be sure to stay in touch

_ with Apple (through Macintosh technical notes, mainly) in case things evolve again.

Chapter 10

Operating System Techniques

e Macintosh ROM calls are implemented . 68000 instructions. When the
Things to remember

68000 tries to execute one of tenaaRO |ne me
called thetrapdispatcher

system heap.‘Beware,2 thong Ly appthistecniehaso changed a lot

overtime,andthere'sno

0
officia

todo it,
ay te

Loo

311

im
y

A

PP

EN

DICE

APPENDIX A:

Assembly Language Overview

APPENDIX B:

Common Problems

APPENDIX C:

Ancient History

APPENDIX D:

Debugging Quick Reference Guide

§

313

A

P

PEN

DI

X

A

Assembly Language Overview
The goal of this appendix is to show you how to look at an assembly language
program and understand what's going on. This appendix is designed to introduce

the 68000 family from the perspective of a high-level language programmer who’s
going to be debugging compiled object code—you, for example.
This appendix assumes you have no prior knowledge of assembly language. It

assumes that you know how to program in Pascal or C, and it assumes you understand the basic principles behind the hexadecimal and binary numbering systems.
You'll probably get more out of it if you have written a Macintosh program, but it’s

not required.
Most likely, as you read this appendix, you'll find some facts that are new,

while other sections may rehash stuff that you already know. Please try to stay
awake through the parts you find boring; the information that's presented here is

vital. If you already know it, that’s fine.
After you've read and learned what's in this appendix, you should be able to
lookat an assembly language program, including your program after it’s translated
by the compiler, and at least understand what the instructions are doing. Chapters
9 and 6 will help you correlate your high-level source program with the object code
that you're looking at.
In this appendix, you should assume that anything we say about the 68000 is
also true for the entire processor family, unless otherwise noted. Macintosh computers over the years have used 68000, 68020, 68030, and 68040 microprocessors.

315

316

Appendix A

To appreciate the difference between being able to write assembly language
programs and being able to read them, imagine that you're trying to read and
understand a sentence in a human language that you don’t speak. If you under-

stand a few words in a sentence, you may be able to glean some meaning without
knowing about verb conjugation, noun declension, tense, voice, or other grammatical rules. For example, you can probably figure out what La Quinta Sinfonia di

Beethoven means in Italian, but if you don’t speak Italian, you probably couldn’t
have constructed the phrase yourself.

Terminology corner.

What's the difference between assembly language

and machine language? Actually, these terms can be used almost interchangeably. The only difference is that machine language usually refers to
the raw object code that the microprocessor executes, the actual byte-by-byte
description of a program, like this: 53 4B. Assembly language is a little better,
using mnemonic instruction and register names to make things more humanreadable. The preceding machine language program is equivalent to this
assembly language instruction: SUBQ.W #1,A3. Only people who are really

twisted write program in machine language, since there’s no benefit to it. One
assembly language instruction translates directly into one machine language
instruction, so you have absolute control over the assembler’s output. Once in

a while, though, in a debugger, you may actually have to type in a word or
two directly in machine language. It’s interesting, but only in small doses.

Programming a microprocessor
Assembly language programs generally show more attention to detail than highlevel language programs. We usually think of high-level languages as being more

powerful than assembly language, but this really depends on your definition of the

word “powerful.” Everything that can be done ina high-level language can also be
done in assembly language—obviously, because every program that runs on a
microprocessor must ultimately be in assembly language.
The Macintosh’s microprocessor understands only assembly language. All

communications with the CPU must be done in its strict language. Every higher-

level function that you see, every for statement, every case statement, every menu

drawn on the screen, every application program, happens because of the execution
of microprocessor code.

The most fundamental capability of any microprocessor is the ability to accept

and execute instructions. These instructions are stored in the computer’s memory,

Assembly Language Overview

in either RAM or ROM. The microprocessor knows how to execute these instruc-

tions because of logic that’s built into the chip itself.
Each instruction includes some operands, which are the values used by the
instructions to perform their tasks. For example, the 68000 has an instruction that

will add two numbers together. The two numbers are the operands for the instruction. Operands are roughly equivalent to parameters in high-level languages.
The instructions that the 68000 understands perform various operations. For
example, one set of instructions is used to move datain memory. There’s an instruction that will cause the 68000 to move data from one memory location to another;
you specify the memory locations. Another set of instructions is used to perform
math operations on data in memory; for example, there’s an instruction that adds

the contents of two memory locations together and puts the result in one of the
locations.

since 68000 instructions are stored in memory, they have numerical representations. The instruction that moves data from one memory location to another is
encoded with the number $11F8; the instruction that adds the contents of two

locations is $D178.
All 68000 instructions are 2 bytes long, like these, but some require additional

bytes to specify the operands. If you use $11F8 to move a byte from one location to
another, you must specify the source and destination addresses following the
$11F8. Since different instructions require different numbers and formats of oper-

ands, a full instruction plus operands takes 2 to 10 bytes.
Assembly language assigns names to each instruction. The sample instruction,

which moves a byte, isnamed MOVE in assembly language. These names are called
mnemonics because they’re more memorable (for humans) than things like $11F8.
Mnemonics have no intrinsic meaning to the microprocessor; it only understands
the numerical representation. Mnemonics are understood by assemblers, which
translate programs expressed in mnemonics into raw instructions.
In addition to the memory provided by the computer’s RAM and ROM, the
CPU contains a very important little chunk of its own memory. Like RAM, this
memory can be read from and written to by the 68000. This memory consists of 16
sets of 4 bytes each; each set of 4 bytes is called a register. The registers are divided

into two groups, the data registers and the address registers. Each register has a
name: the data registers are named DO, D1, D2, and so on, through D7; the address
registers are named AO through A7.

Assembly language programs use the registers to hold various data and

addresses, as you might have guessed by their names. The 68000 has instructions

that work on registers. For example, the MOVE instruction can also be used to
move data between two registers or between a register and memory.

317

318

Appendix A

In general, instructions that operate on registers are faster than those that
operate on memory locations. This is because the registers are actually built into the

CPU, so it doesn’t have to read or write the computer’s memory to do the operation.
There are only 16 registers, and some of them are dedicated to special pur-

poses. One address register, A7, is used to control an extremely important part of
memory known as the stack. The stack is a pile of data in memory that grows as

things are added to it and shrinks as they're removed from it. Register A7, which is
also called the stack pointer, or just SP, always points to the top of the stack, which
is the location where the next thing to be added will go. The stack is used to hold
lots of things, including a program's variables, temporarily saved values of registers, and more.

“Only” sixteen registers.

As microprocessors go, a collection of 16 registers

of 32 bits eachis a huge group. You'll find few widely available processors that
have this much register space available.
Stack grows downward in memory.

A curious fact about most implemen-

tations of stacks on microprocessors, including the Macintosh, is that the stack
grows downward in memory as it gets larger. This means that the so-called

top of the stack is actually
the address of the lowest byte on the stack.

Register A5 has a special significance in the Macintosh. A number of important
values can be derived from the contents of A5. For example, A5 contains the

address of a global value that points to QuickDraw’s global variables; see Inside
Macintosh for more information. Also, A5 is used to find the application’s jump
table, an important data structure that’s described in Chapter 6.

In addition to these 16 general-purpose registers, there are a couple of other
registers. One register contains the address of the next instruction to be executed;

this is called the program counter, or PC. As the program executes, the value in this
register is automatically incremented by the amount necessary to get to the next
instruction.

The last register holds various status information about the 68000, so it’s called

the status register. The most important part of the status register is the lowest byte

(8 bits), which contains result information about instructions that have just been
executed. One bit, called the Z bit, checks data for zero whenever an operation

takes place; for example, if the 68000 executes a MOVE instruction, and the value
that’s moved is zero, the Z bit is set to 1.

Assembly Language Overview

There are five bits like this, called condition codes, and this byte of the status
register is known as the condition codes register, or CCR. The 68000 includes a set

of instructions that takes various actions depending on the settings of the condition
codes. These instructions are used to make the program do different things
depending on the result of other operations. For example, there’s an instruction

that jumps to a different part of the program if the Z condition code is set. This is
how if statements in high-level languages are implemented in compiled code.

Integer arithmetic
In the 68000 family, the size of an instruction’s data may be a byte (8 bits), a word (16

bits or 2 bytes), or a long word (32 bits or 4 bytes). High-level languages define data
types that correspond to these sizes. For example, the Pascal type integer and the C
short are word sized; Pascal longints and C longs are long word sized.

The size of the data defines the range of values it can occupy. A value that must
fit in a single bit can contain two different values: 0 and 1. This is enough to hold the
value of a Boolean variable, and some languages are capable of packing values this
tightly.

Since 1 bit can hold two different values, the number of distinct values that can

be represented in N bits is equal to 2. This means that 8 bits can represent 28, or 256
different values; 16 bits can represent 216 or 65,536 different values; and 32-bit
numbers can hold 2°, which is 4,294,967,296 different values.
Programs usually need to represent negative as well as positive values. To
implement this, most microprocessors use a mathematical scheme called two’s

complement arithmetic. In two’s complement arithmetic, the highest bit of the
value is used to indicate its sign: if this bit is a 1, the value is negative; if 0, it’s

positive.

If the value is positive, the lower bits simply give the value; if it’s negative, these
bits form the two’s complement of the value. A value’s two’s complement is com-

puted by subtracting the value from zero plus a borrow and negating the result.

What's a borrow?

Remember the concept of borrowing, back when you

learned subtraction? For example, to subtract
52 from 161, you first subtract
the ones column: 1 minus 2. Since you can’t subtract 2 from 1, you borrow
from the tens column, making it 11 minus 2. It’s the same idea here. If you’re
working with a byte, “zero plus a borrow’ is $100; if it’s a word, “zero plus a
borrow” is $10000; for a long word, it’s $100000000.

319

320

Appendix A

This somewhat arcane concept can be best explained with an example. Given
the byte $FF, what two’s complement value does it represent?
In binary, $FF is 1111 1111. Since its high bit is set, it’s negative. To find out its

value, we subtract $FF from zero plus a borrow; in other words, we subtract $FF

from$100. The result of this subtraction is $1; negating this gives negative $1, or —1.
Therefore, the byte $FF represents —1 in two’s complement arithmetic.

Another example is the word $92D4. Its binary representation is 1001 0010 1101
0100. Again, the high bit is set, so this value is negative. Since it’s a word and it’s
negative, we can find out its value by subtracting it from $10000. The result is

$6D2C, or 27,948 decimal. So $92D4 is — 27,948 decimal in two’s complement form.
For positive numbers, we can get the value directly. The two’s complement

long word $40899610 is 0100 0000 1000 1001 1001 1010 0001 0000 in binary. The high

bit is clear, so it’s positive, and the value is simply $40899610, or 1,082,758,672
decimal.

Note that the size of the data is vital in determining its value. The value $A0 is
— 96 decimal (— $60) if it’s a byte; if it’s a word, $00A0, it’s positive, and it’s 160
decimal.
There’s a neat shorthand way to figure a negative two’s complement value. If

you invest all the bits in the value, then add one, you'll get the correct negative
value. Let’s try this with the examples.

The byte $FF is 1111 1111 in binary; flipping all the bits gives 0000 0000; adding
one gives 0000 0001; so $FF is — 1.

The word $92D4 is 1001 0010 1101 0100 in binary; inverting the bits gives 0110
1101 0010 1011, which is $6D2B; adding one gives $6D2C, or 27,948 decimal; so
$92D4 is — 27,948 decimal.
Luckily, most disassemblers show you signed decimal values when they dis-

assemble two’s complement numbers. For example, an instruction that included
the word-sized operand $FFEO would usually show up in the disassembly as — 32,

which is more meaningful for humans.

Addressing modes
Most 68000 instructions require operands, which are a lot like parameters to highlevel language routines. For example, as we discussed earlier, the MOVE instruc-

tion requires two operands: the source of the data to be moved and its destination.

In addition to specifying the operands, most instructions allow you to specify the

size of the operands. Usually, the operands can be bytes, words, or long words.
At different times in an assembly language program, the operands will be

found in different ways. For example, if the programmer wants to add 1000 to the
value in register DO, there are two operands: the value 1000 and the register DO.

Assembly Language Overview

Each of these operands is represented in assembly language instruction as a particular addressing mode. A particular instruction’s addressing mode is the method

used by that instruction to calculate the address of its operands.
This example, adding 1000 to the value in register DO, is written in assembly

language like this: ADD.W #1000,D0. The name of the instruction is ADD. The
suffix .W after ADD indicates that the size of the operand in this instruction is a
word (2 bytes). We could also use .B for a byte and .L for a long word (4 bytes). An
instruction with no suffix is assumed to have word-sized operands by default. The

symbol # in front of the value 1000 indicates that the first operand is in the immediate addressing mode; in other words, the value specified in the instruction is the
actual value to be used. It’s not a memory location ora

register specification, but the

value itself.

Where do the bytes come from?

If a .W suffix is used with a memory

location, the word is taken from the byte addressed and the one immediately
following it; if it’s a long word operand in memory, the bytes are the one
addressed and the next three bytes. If the operand is a register, the lower
word of the register is used, ignoring the upper word; if a register is used asa
byte-sized operand, the lowest byte is used, and the upper three bytes are
ignored (see Figure A-1).

Register DO

Register DO

Register DO

S4E 65 69 6C

S4E 65 69 6C

SAE 65 69 6C

Register D1

Register D1]

Register D1

$44 99 85 EF

$44 99 85 6C

$44 99 69 6C

Original values

After MOVE.b DO,D1
(low byte is moved,
high 3 bytes of D1
are unchanged)

After MOVE.W DO,D1
(low 2 bytes are moved,
high 2 bytes of D1
are unchanged)

Figure A-1.

Operand sizes

ie

321

322

Appendix A

This instruction’s second operand is register DO. This specification, simply the
name of a register, is the data register direct mode. It just means that the instruction
specifies a register that is to be used as the operand. By the way, the first operand is
called the source operand, and the second is called the destination operand.

These addressing modes, immediate and data register direct, are two of the 14
addressing modes that the 68000 provides. Some of these modes are rarely used.

Not every instruction provides all the addressing modes; for most instructions,
however, the most commonly desired addressing modes are available.
In an assembly language instruction, the address of the operand is known as

the effective address of the operand. In some of the more powerful addressing
modes, the effective address is calculated by adding several values together. We'll

discuss how this works later in this section.
Let’s take a look at the 68000’s addressing modes. The 14 modes can be divided
into six broad categories: register direct addressing, absolute data addressing, program counter relative addressing, register indirect addressing, immediate data

addressing, and implied addressing. The 68020 adds a new category: memory
indirect addressing.

Register direct addressing
In the register direct addressing modes, the operand is a 68000 register. In our
preceding example, we saw an example of data register direct addressing. There’s
one other register direct mode, called address register direct. This mode works just

like data register direct, except that an address register is used for the operand. An
example of address register direct addressing is ADD A0,D0, which adds the values
in AO and D0 and puts the result in D0. In this instruction, the first operand is
specified with address register direct addressing; the second uses the data register

direct mode.

Absolute data addressing
In the absolute addressing modes, the effective address is the actual address specified in the instruction. There are two absolute addressing modes: absolute short
and absolute long. The only difference between these two modes is the range of
values allowed. Short addressing permits addresses in the range $0 through $FFFF

forward or backward; long addresses can be in the range $0 through $FFFFFFFF.
If an absolute address will fit into a word, most compilers will automatically use

the short mode, since it requires only one additional word per instruction, while
the long mode takes two additional words.

Assembly Language Overview

Here’s an example of short absolute addressing with the MOVE instruction:

MOVE.L$7598,D0. In this instruction, the source (first) operand uses short absolute
addressing; the destination (second) operand uses data register direct addressing.
Note that the .L suffix on the MOVE instruction indicates the size of the operand;
that is, a long word (32 bytes) of data will be moved from memory location $7598
into register DO. The .L does not mean that the long absolute mode is being used.

In the instruction MOVE.B D0,$DFFI1FF, the destination operand is too large to
fit into one word, so the absolute long addressing mode must be used for the

address $DFF1FF.
The most common use of absolute data addressing in Macintosh programs is
for references to low memory globals, which can always be found at fixed (abso-

lute) addresses. In general, absolute addressing is not used a lot in Macintosh
programs; because most objects are relocatable, absolute addressing can’t be used,

since the programmer doesn’t know where the objects will be loaded. Other
modes, which we'll discuss, let the program address these objects.

- Watch that mode. Be very careful when. you'reJooking at assembly lan-

guage code to see the difference between immediate and absolute address-

ing. If immediate addressingis specified (usually with a # symbol), take the

value of the operand; if it’s absolute addressing (there’ sno #), it’s a memory
reference, not an immediate value.

Program counter relative addressing
On the Macintosh, lots of little pieces of code coexist in memory at the same time.

These programs include the application’s segments, desk accessories, definition
procedures for menus, window, and controls, and others. Each of these objects is
independently loaded into memory when it’s needed. For maximum flexibility,
they can be loaded virtually anywhere in RAM. In addition, they can be relocated
if they’re not locked.
The programmer has no way of knowing where the objects will be loaded at
the time the code is written. This means that if the code has to use the address of a
location within the object, it cannot be an absolute address. For example, if a desk
accessory has stored a constant within the desk accessory’s code, it cannot use

absolute addressing to find the constant, since the programmer doesn’t know the
absolute address of the constant—it depends on where in memory the desk accessory was loaded.

323

324

Appendix A

To solve this problem, the 68000 implements a clever pair of addressing modes

called program counter relative, usually known as PC-relative addressing (PC has
been an abbreviation for program counter since way back when IBM thought
personal computers were Pretty Cute and Primarily Cheap). When a program uses

PC-relative addressing, the effective address is computed by adding an offset to the
current program counter. Since the program counter holds the address of the
instruction currently being executed, PC-relative addressing works no matter

where in memory the code is located. |
The first and most common PC-relative mode is called program counter rela-

tive with offset. In this mode, the instruction includes an offset that is added to the

current PC to produce the effective address. For example, an instruction like
MOVE.W 244(PC),D4 will move the word that’s 244 bytes from the instruction
being executed into register D4.
Usually, you don’t have to compute offsets like this yourself, even when writing assembly language

programs. Most

assemblers will

automatically use

PC-relative addressing when a code module refers to an address within the module

itself. This mode is most commonly used for the JSR (jump to subroutine) instruction, which we’ll talk about later. When a routine in a code module calls another
routine in the same module, the JSR instruction can use PC-relative addressing.

The second and much more obscure kind of PC-relative addressing is called
program counter relative with index and offset. In this mode, the assembly

language instruction supplies an offset that is added to the program counter,just as
in the previous mode. This mode, though, also adds another value, called the
index, which can be any data or address register. In assembly language, it looks like

this: JSR 2004(PC,A1.W). The effective address here is computed by adding the PC
to the offset 2004 and the index, which is the word stored in register Al (A1.W). Note

that you can also use a long word index by specifying a .L suffix after the name of
the address register to be used as an index.
This addressing mode is usually used for JSRs when a table of addresses has

been built and the program must compute which one to take at run time. For
example, in a Pascal case or C switch statement, the compiler may construct a table
consisting of addresses of the various cases. The program can then load the case

selector into a register and execute a PC-relative JSR or JMP (jump) instruction with
displacement and the index, using the register that has the case selector as the

index.

Assembly Language Overview

Register indirect addressing
Often a programmer will want to compute an effective address based on an address
that’s in an address register. The 68000 provides five powerful addressing modes to
specify addresses this way.
The first of these modes is called register indirect. In this mode, the effective
address is simply the contents of the specified address register. For example, an
instruction like MOVE.L $936,(AO) will move the long word that’s stored in location

$936 into the location whose address is in register AO. So, if AO contained, say, $63448

before this instruction was executed, the contents of location $936 would be moved
into location $63448. In this instruction, the destination operand uses register indi-

rect addressing; the source operand uses short absolute addressing.
When the program manipulates objects on the stack, the stack pointer must be
updated constantly to reflect the current top of the stack. Before a new object is
placed on the stack, the stack pointer must be decremented to make room for the
new object. When an object is removed from the stack, the stack pointer must be
incremented past the old object.

Since this is such a common technique, the 68000 has defined an addressing
mode to combine the two operations of pushing something on the stack and

decrementing the stack pointer into a single instruction. Adding an object to the
stack is accomplished with the addressing mode called predecrement register
indirect. When a program uses this mode, the stack pointer is automatically dec-

remented to make room for the new object before the object is placed on the stack.
The assembly language looks like this: MOVE.W D0, — (A7). The minus sign indicates the predecrement mode.

This instruction will cause two things to happen in sequence; first, the stack

pointer (register A7) will be decremented by 2 bytes (.W) to make room for the new
value on the stack; then the word in D0 will be placed on the stack. This process is
shown in Figure A-2.

The 68000 automatically decrements the stack pointer by 2 bytes because the
size of the operand is 2 bytes. If the operand were a long word, the stack pointer
would be decreased by 4. You would expect, then, that a byte-sized operand would
decrement the stack pointer by 1 byte; actually, a byte-size operand will cause the
stack pointer to be adjusted by 2 bytes. This ensures that the stack pointer stays

even. Since word- and long-word-sized objects must begin at even addresses, this
guarantees that future objects pushed on the stack will begin at even addresses.

The 68000 has a corresponding addressing mode for removing objects from the
stack. It’s called postincrement register indirect. In this mode, the instruction is

executed first; then the stack pointer is incremented by the appropriate amount.
Here’s an example of an assembly language instruction that uses this mode:

MOVE.L (A7) + ,(A2). This instruction will move a long word from the top of the

325

326

Appendix A

Stack

Stack

Stack

Stack

pointer

Stack

Stack

pointer

pointer

DO = $83465523

DO = $83465523

DO = $83465523

Stack and DO
before instruction

After
predecrementing

After DO.W is
put on the stack

Figure A-2.

Predecrement addressing mode

stack into the address pointed to by register A2. After the long word has been
moved, the stack pointer will be incremented by 4 bytes, removing the value from
the stack.

These modes are often called autopredecrement and autopostincrement. The
position of the plus or minus sign in the assembly language reminds you that the
decrement operation takes place before the instruction is executed, and the increment happens after the instruction is done. There are no preincrement or postdecrement modes—they wouldn’t serve any useful purpose.

Other uses for these modes.

Although these modes are most often used

with the stack, any address register can be the one that’s predecremented or
postincremented. Postincrement is often used by compilers to move a small

number of bytes from one location to another. To do this, the compiler first
loads the location of the source of the bytes into one address register, typically
AO. Then it loads the destination address into another address register, usu-

ally A1. It can then use MOVE instructions with postincrement to move bytes,
four at a time, in this form: MOVE.L (AO) + ,(A1)+. This instruction moves a

long word (4 bytes) from the address pointed to by AO to the address pointed
to by Al, and then increments both pointers by four. Four of these instruc-

tions in a row is a very fast way to move 16 bytes. This technique is often used
for making local copies of procedure parameters in Pascal (see Chapter 6 for
details).

Assembly Language Overview

The other register indirect modes are similar to the PC-relative modes. They’re
called register indirect with offset and indexed register indirect with offset. These
modes allow the programmer or compiler to specify an address register and one or
two values to be added to the address register to compute the effective address. In

the instruction MOVE.W 8(A6),12(A1,D0.W), the source operand is specified using
the register indirect with offset mode. The effective address will be computed by
adding 8 to the contents of register A6. This is usually spoken as “8 off A6” or “8

above A6.” This addressing mode is used to specify global and local variables and
parameters in high-level languages.
The destination operand uses indexed register indirect with offset. Its effective
address is calculated by adding 12, the contents of Al, and the word-sized contents

of D0. Once again, this mode is most useful when the program has built a table of
addresses with Al + 12 pointing to the table and D0 containing an index into the
table. Indexed register indirect is one of the least often used 68000 addressing
modes.

Immediate data addressing
We discussed immediate data addressing earlier in this section. Immediate
addressing means that the data for the instruction is specified right after the
instruction; there’s no effective address to be computed. The instruction MOVE.B

#$34, —$244(A5) puts the value of the source operand, $34, into the location at
— $244 off A5 (also called “$244 below A5”). The # symbol in the source operand

indicates that immediate addressing is being used. If the # were not present, the
source operand would be in short absolute mode, and the contents of memory

location $34 would be used instead of the value $34.
A variant of immediate data addressing is the quick immediate data address-

ing mode. This mode is just like standard immediate addressing, except that the

source operand must fit into a single byte (for some instructions, the quick mode
only permits values that can fit into three bits, which limits the values to zero
through 7). When this mode is used, the data is actually squeezed into the instruction word itself. So an instruction like MOVEQ #1,D3, which moves a 1 into D3,
only takes 2 bytes in memory. Most assemblers will automatically produce a quick
immediate operand if the instruction has this mode and the operand is a byte. In
the 68000, only the ADD, SUB, and MOVE instructions allow quick immediate
addressing.

327

328

Appendix A

Bigmove.

Although the MOVEQ instruction permits only operands that fit

into a single byte, itactually moves a 32-bit sign extension of the operand. This
means that a MOVEQ #1, DO puts 0000 0001 into DO, and MOVEQ # —1, D1
puts FFFF FFFF (the 32-bit version of — 1) into D1.

Implied addressing
The final category of addressing modes is implied addressing or implied register

addressing. In this mode, the instruction itself contains the address of the operands, and the operands are registers; the effective address is implied by the instruction itself. For example, the RTS instruction has only one form. It removes the

address from the top of the stack, increments the stack pointer by 4 bytes, and then
places the address in the program counter, causing execution to resume at that
location. The stack pointer is the implied register in this instruction.

Another example of implied addressing is the PEA instruction. This instruction
takes one operand. It calculates this operand’s effective address and then pushes it

on the stack after predecrementing the stack pointer. The source operand can use
one of several 68000 instruction modes, but the destination is once again implied to

be the stack pointer. For example, PEA 1670(PC) will calculate the address of the
location at 1670 off the PC and then predecrement the stack pointer and push this
value; PEA (A3) will push the address that’s in A3 (exactly like

a MOVE.L

A3,—(A7) ); PEA $40FA82 will simply push the address $40FA82 on the stack.

The 14 addressing modes are summarized in Figure A-3.

68020
The 68020 adds the capability for memory indirect addressing. The memory indirect modes allow you to place an address somewhere in memory, then put a
pointer to it into an address register. With memory indirect addressing, the 68020
will use the pointer in the address register to find the address in memory, then use
that address as the effective address. In this mode, the microprocessor is actually
performing double-indirection in a single statement.
You might think that the Macintosh, which uses double-indirection all the time

for relocatable objects, would thrive on this mode. Actually, you'll find that most
Macintosh compilers don’t use this mode, because it produces instructions that are
much slower than the old-fashioned two-instruction equivalent.

Assembly Language Overview

Figure A-3.

68000 addressing modes

Kind of addressing

Mode

Example

Register direct

Data register direct
Address register direct

MOVE D0,D1
MOVE AO0,D0

Absolute data

Absolute short
Absolute long

MOVE $1024,D0
MOVE $2212348,D0

Program counter relative

Relative with offset
Relative with index and offset

MOVE $200(PC),D0
MOVE $342(PC,D1),D0

Register indirect

Register indirect
Postincrement register indirect
Predecrement register indirect
Register indirect with offset
Index register indirect with offset

Immediate data

Immediate
Quick immediate

MOVE 0#$5,D0

Implied register

MOVE CCR,D0

Implied addressing

MOVE (A1,D0)
MOVE (A7) + ,DO
MOVE -—(A0),D0
MOVE $12(A6),D0
© MOVE $20(A2,D1),D0

MOVE #$7961,D0

68000 instruction set
The 68000 provides 56 different kinds of instructions. We’ve already discussed a
few of them, including ADD, MOVE, JSR, and PEA. Many of these instructions

work with byte, word, and long word data, and most of them allow various
addressing modes to be used for operands. Some instruction types permit all 14 of
the 68000’s addressing modes to be used.
The 68000 instruction set can be broken up into eight categories: data move-

ment, integer arithmetic, logical operations, shift and rotate, bit manipulation,
binary-coded decimal, program control, and system control. We'll discuss each of
these categories. We won't cover every 68000 instruction, just those that are most

frequently used by compilers.

Data movement instructions
Data movement instructions are used to transfer data between memory locations

and registers. The most common of these is the MOVE instruction. This instruction,
which takes two operands, can be used to move data from one register to another,
from one memory location to another, or between memory anda register in either
direction. All addressing modes are allowed for the source; most are allowed for the
destination. The data may be a byte, word, or long word.

329

330

Appendix A

several variations of the standard MOVE instruction perform special-purpose

functions. These include MOVEM (move multiple registers), which moves any set
of registers to a specified memory location, MOVEA, which moves a value to an
address register; and MOVEQ, which moves an embedded 8-bit number to a data
register.

Whena high-level language's assignment statement is compiled, the result is
usually a MOVE instruction in the object code.

_ Instruction variants. Many 68000 instructions have. variants that extend

ws plish some
so function.For example, everythir
ev
ing.-MOVEQ doescan also be done

with the;generic MOVE, but MOVEQisfaster and takes less memory. Most

assemblers will automatically produce the most efficient variant ofaninstruc- |

tion. In general, fromthe viewpoint of an
mn objectcode reader,an instruction

_ and its variants do the same Wg

|

|

Other data movement instructions include LEA (load effective address), which
computes an effective address and loads it into an address register; PEA, which
pushes an effective address onto the stack; LINK and UNLK, which are used to
manage data structures called stack frames; EXG, which exchanges the values in
two registers; and SWAP, which trades the high and low words in a data register.

The data movement instructions are summarized in Figure A-4.

Figure A-4.

Data movement operations

Instruction

Description

EXG.

Exchange two registers

LEA

Load effective address into register

LINK

Create subroutine stack frame

MOVE

Move data in registers or memory

PEA

Push effective address on stack

SWAP

Swap high and low halves of a register

UNLK

Destroy subroutine stack frame

Assembly Language Overview

Integer arithmetic instructions
These instructions are used to perform two’s complement math operations with
data in registers and memory. These instructions are generated when the source
program performs integer arithmetic. In general, addition, subtraction, multiplica-

tion, and division in a high-level language produce these instructions when both
operands are integers or long integers.
The integer arithmetic instructions include ADD, which adds two operands

and places the result in the second operand. The basic ADD instruction requires
one operand to be a data register; the other operand may be specified with any

addressing mode. The ADDA (add address) variant allows the destination to be an

address register; there are also an ADDI (add immediate) variant, which allows an
immediate value to be added to a memory location, and an ADDQ (add quick)
variant, which is a fast way to add a quick immediate value.
There’s a corresponding set of subtraction instructions. These include SUB,
SUBA, SUBI, and SUBQ. Their functions are identical to their addition counterparts.

Short take. The only possible values for the first operand in an ADDQ or

SUBQ instruction are 1 through 8, since the value is jammed into three bits.

There are two multiplication instructions. MULU (unsigned multiply) multiplies two unsigned word-sized numbers. One of them must be in a data register.

The result is an unsigned long word and is left in the specified data register, the
second operand. The other operand can be specified with any 68000 addressing
mode except address register direct.
The other multiplication instruction is. MULS

(signed multiply). This instruc-

tion is just like MULU, except that the values multiplied are treated as two’s com-

plement signed values, as is the long word result that’s produced. Once again, the
destination operand is a data register, and the source operand may be specified
with any mode except address register direct.
The 68000 has a similar pair of division instructions. The DIVU instruction

divides a long word destination operand by a word-sized source operand. The

operation is an integer division. The quotient is put into the lower word of the
destination, and the remainder is put into the upper word. Like the multiplication
instructions, the destination operand must be a data register. There’s also a DIVS
instruction that treats the operands as signed numbers.

331

332

Appendix A

The CMP instruction is used to compare two values. The 68000’s condition
codes are set depending on the result of the comparison. This instruction is usually
followed by a “branch conditionally” instruction (see the Program Control Instructions section). One of the values must be in a data register to use the generic CMP

instruction. There are variants that compare a value to an address register (CMPA),
an immediate value (CMPI), and a special variant that compares the values pointed
to by two address registers (CMPM, compare memory).
Another instruction that sets the condition codes is TST (test), which compares
a value with zero and sets the condition codes according to the result. This instruc-

tion, like CMP, is usually followed by a branch instruction.
The compare and test instructions are generated by the compiler as part of the

implementation of high-level programs’ if statements. In addition, they’re used to

test loop boundary conditions in for, repeat, and while statements.
The NEG instruction is used to negate an operand, that is, to convert a number
to its two’s complement. As we said earlier, the effect of this operation is to flip all
the bits and add 1. Mathematically, the NEG instruction multiplies a value by — 1.

Sometimes a program must convert a value from a smaller type to a larger type;
for example, when a Pascal program adds an integer to a long integer, the program
must first convert the integer to a long integer.

Suppose that the integer’s value was — 14, and the long integer’s value was 12.
In hex, these numbers would be $FFF2 and $0000000C, respectively. Before they
can be added, the integer must be converted to the long integer representation of
— 14, which is $FFFFFFF2. The 68000 provides an instruction to do this automatically; it’s called EXT (sign extend). It automatically copies the operand’s high bit

(the sign bit) into all the bits of the high word, converting a word into a long word
whether it’s negative or positive. The EXT instruction also works on bytes being
extended to words; it automatically figures out which to do based on the size of the
operand.
The 68000 instruction CLR is used to clear the bits of the operand to zero. If the
.W or .B suffix is used, only the specified bits will be cleared. This instruction is often

used when an assignment statement assigns a value of zero.
Figure A-5 summarizes the integer arithmetic operations.

Logical instructions
The 68000 defines a set of instructions to perform logical operations between operands. These instructions and variants allow an assembly language program to
perform the four basic logical operations: and, or, exclusive-or, and not.

Assembly Language Overview

Figure A-5.

Integer arithmetic instructions

Instruction

Description

ADD

Add operands and place result in destination

CLR

Clear operand to zero

CMP

Compare operands and set condition codes

DIVS

Divide destination by source (signed); result in destination

DIVU

Divide destination by source (unsigned); result in destination

EXT

Sign-extend operand

MULS

Multiply operands (signed); result in destination

MULU

Multiply operands (unsigned); result in destination

NEG

Negate operand

SUB

Subtract source from destination

TAS

Test and set a byte

TST

Compare operand with zero and set condition codes

The AND instruction performs a logical and between two operands and puts

the result in the destination operand. The logical and function compares corresponding bits in the operands; for example, it compares bit 0 of each operand. If

both bits compared are set (have value 1), the corresponding bit in the result is 1.

Otherwise, the result bit is cleared (set to 0).
Here’s an example. In the instruction AND.B #$6B,D0, assume that register DO
contains the byte value $CA. In binary, $6B is 0110 1011, and $CA is 1100 1010. To
logically and these two values, each bit is compared with its counterpart; if both bits
are 1, a 1 is placed in the destination operand (D0). The first two bits are 0 in the
source and 1 in the destination; this generates a 0. The next two are both 1; this
generates a 1. Repeating this process for all the bits, the result is 0100 1010, or $4A. This
instruction is used by the compiler to represent the Pascal logical operator ‘‘and” and
the C logical operator “&.” Figure A-6 demonstrates the logical and function.

333

334

Appendix A

If both bits are ones, the result bit is a one; otherwise, the result bit is a zero.

“oN
1
0

0
0

101
10 1

1
0

010

0

10

0=S4A

$68 =0
$CA=1

1
1

AND

Figure A-6.

1

Logical and

The AND instruction has several variants. The most common is the ANDI
variant, which can be used when one of the operands is an immediate value.

The 68000 instruction OR implements a logical or function. This function
compares two operands, as does logical and. If either the source or destination bit is
1, the result bit is 1. If both the source and destination bits are 1, the result bit is 1
also. If both source and destination bits are 0, the result bit is 0.

If we use the example OR.B #$6B,D0, with $CA in register DO, the 68000 will
logically or the binary values 0110 1011 and 1100 1010. The result is 1110 1011 or

SEB. The compiler generates an OR instruction when there’s an “or” in the Pascal

source or a “|” (vertical bar, the logical or operator) in a C program. Figure A-7
demonstrates how the logical or function works.
Like the AND instruction, OR has a variant called ORI that can be used if the
source operand is in the immediate addressing mode.

The exclusive-or function is very much like logical or, except for one rule: if both
the source and destination have a 1 in a bit position, that bit becomes a 0 in the
result. As in the logical or function, if either the source or destination has a 1, the
result is 1, and if both source and destination are 0, the destination is 0.

lf either bit is one, the result bit is a one; otherwise, the result bit is a zero.

11
1 0

0
0

1
101
10
1 0

111

=0

1

$68 =0
$SCA=1
OR

Figure A-7.

Logical or

0

1

1=$EB

Assembly Language Overview

The mnemonic for exclusive-or is EOR. In the instruction EOR #$6B,D0, with

$CA in register DO, the result will be 1010 0001, or $A1. Figure A-8 shows exactly
how this result was computed. The EOR instruction also has an EORI (exclusive-or
immediate) mode.

lf either bit, but not both, is one, the result bit is a one; otherwise, the result bit is a zero.

1
1

1
0

0
0

10

1

«0

$68 =0
$CA=1

TM

1011
101 0

OR

Figure A-8.

00

0

1=$Al

Logical exclusive-or

Exclusive-or instructions are usually generated in object code when the

exclusive-or logical operator has been used in the source. In C, for example, this

operator is “”.”
The fourth logical instruction is NOT. This operator causes all the operand’s
bits to be flipped: ones become zeros and zeros become ones. This instruction is

generated when the source program uses the “not” operator (in Pascal) or the“ ~”
operator (in C). Note that this operation differs from the mathematical NEG
instruction in that it simply reverses all the bits of the operand. NEG multiplies the
operand by —1. The 68000’s logical instructions are summarized in Figure A-9.

Figure A-9.

Logical instructions

Instruction

Description

AND

Perform logical and on two operands

OR

Perform logical or on two operands

EOR

Perform logical exclusive-or on two operands

NOT

Perform logical not on one operand

Shift and rotate instructions
The 68000 defines a set of instructions that shift and rotate bits within operands.

Although many of these instructions are rarely used by compiled object code, there
are a few important ones.

335

336

Appendix A

The shift instructions cause the bits in an operand to be shifted a given number
of positions, either to the left or the right. There are instructions that are designed

for logical use and instructions designed for mathematical use (we'll discuss how).

The shift instructions cause one or more bits to be “‘lost’” when they’re shifted out
of the operand. The 68000 also defines a set of instructions that rotate bits so that

bits shifted out of one end go back into the other end.
There are four instructions to shift bits: ASL (arithmetic shift left), ASR (arithmetic shift right), LSL (logical shift left), and LSR (logical shift right). The arithmetic
shifts are used to multiply or divide integers. An integer can be multiplied by 2 by

shifting it 1 bit to the left; shifting it 1 bit to the right divides it by 2. This works

because each digit position in the binary numbering system represents the position
to its right, multiplied by 2, just as in the decimal (base 10) system each position
represents the position to its right multiplied by 10 (ones, tens, hundreds, thousands, and so on).

Compilers use the arithmetic shift instructions as shortcuts for multiplication
and division when the divisor or one of the multiplication operands is a power of
2. For example, the high-level language expression N * 8 would probably be com-

piled into an ASL instruction that shifted the operand by 3 bits (because 8

is

2*2*2=2%
3).
The logical shift instructions are used when the high-level source program

specifically uses a logical shift operator, like < < in C. The only difference between
the arithmetic shifts and the logical shifts is that the arithmetic-right shift makes the
sign bit stay the same after the shift takes place. This ensures that the arithmetic
shift instructions do proper integer math and respect the sign bit.
Figure A-10 demonstrates the execution of the instruction ASL.W #1,D0,
where D0 contains $534B.
The rotate instructions defined by the 68000 are not generally used for com-

piler code generations. Figure A-11 lists the shift and rotate instructions.

ASL.W #1,D0
(shift all bits left
by one position)

DOW=$534B=0
101 0011
0100
10 71 ~=47

Vidiidiiiaiiia y¥¢
1010

01410

10014

#01

1

0 = $A696

To C flag in condition codes register
This bit becomes zero.
Figure A-10.

Operation of shift instruction

Assembly Language Overview

Figure A-11.

Shift and rotate instructions

Instruction

Description

ASL

Arithmetic shift left

ASR

Arithmetic shift right

LSL

Logical shift left

LSR

Logical shift right

ROL

Rotate left

ROR

Rotate right

ROXL

Rotate left with extend

ROXR

Rotate right with extend

Bit manipulation instructions
The 68000 instruction set includes a group of instructions that are used to test and
manipulate single bits within operands. There are four bit manipulation instruc-

tions: bit test (BTST), bit test and set (BSET), bit test and clear (BCLR), and bit test
and change (BCHG). The bit manipulation instructions operate on byte or long
word operands.

The bit test instruction is used to determine if a bit is one or zero. The Z
condition code is set based on the result; Z is set if the bit tested is 0; Z is cleared if
the bit tested is 1. In the instruction BTST #3,D3, the fourth-lowest bit (bit 3,

numbering from zero) is checked. If the bit is 0, the Z flag is set; if the bit is 1, the Z
flag is cleared. Figure A-12 shows how this works.

Register D3 (low word)
Bitnumber.

«16.74.13.

12

11

10>

O18

BIST #3,D3 tests this bit.
Since it's not zero, the flag is cleared.
Figure A-12.

BTST instruction

337

338

Appendix A

The BSET instruction first tests a bit and sets the Z condition code, just as in the
BTST instruction, but it then sets the bit to 1 after the test. For example, the instruc-

tion BSET #12,(A7) will test bit 2 of the first word on the stack and then set that bit.
The fact that this instruction tests the bit before setting it is usually incidental; often

the programmer or compiler will just want to set the bit and will not care about the
result of the test.

The bit test and clear instruction, BCLR, is similar to the BSET instruction. It first
tests the bit, setting the Z condition code; then, instead of setting the bit to 1, like

BSET, it clears the bit to 0. Once again, the initial testing of the bit is often ignored.
Usually, the programmer or compiler just wants to clear the bit and doesn’t care
about its previous setting.
The last bit manipulation instruction is used to test a bit and then flip it. If the

bit is 0, BCHG changes it to 1 after testing it; if it’s 1, BCHG tests it and then changes
it to 0. Like the two preceding instructions, BCHG is often used just to flip a bit’s

value, with no regard to the previous value that’s tested before the change.
There’s a summary of bit manipulation instructions in Figure A-13.

Figure A-13.

Bit manipulation instructions

Instruction

Description

BCHG

Test a bit, set Z condition code, then change the bit

BCLR

Test a bit, set Z condition code, then clear the bit

BSET

Test a bit, set Z condition code, then set the bit

BIST

Test a bit and set Z condition code

Binary coded decimal instructions
Two’s complement arithmetic is not the only kind of math supported by the 68000.
There’s another mode, called binary-coded decimal, or BCD. In this mode, each

hexadecimal digit represents one decimal digit. Only hex values from 0 to 9 are
allowed; A throughF are illegal, since they're not used in the decimal system. In
this representation, for example, the hex value $28 represents the decimal number
28. Instructions are provided to add, subtract, and negate BCD numbers.

This mode is rarely used, since two’s complement integers are more efficient. A
single BCD byte can represent 100 different values (0 through 99); a two’s complement byte can represent 0 through $FF, or 255 different values. Very few compilers
use BCD arithmetic, so we won’
t list the instructions or discuss them here.

Assembly Language Overview

Program control instructions
The 68000 has a group of instructions that allows the flow of the program to be

changed. These instructions are analogous to instructions like “goto” in Pascal and
C: they cause execution of the program to continue at another location. In assembly
language, there are three groups of program control instructions: conditional

instructions, unconditional instructions, and return instructions. All these are
important in compiled object code.

The first conditional instruction is the conditional branch instruction. This

instruction tests the condition codes for a given condition; if the condition is true,
it branches to another location. The general form of this instruction is written Bcc,
which means “branch on condition codes.” There are actually 14 different
branches, each of which tests a different condition. For example, BEQ means
“branch if equal.” The 14 conditional branches are listed in Figure A-14.
Usually, a Bcc instruction follows a CMP instruction, which sets the condition
codes. For example, a program can compare two values for equality and then
branch if they’re equal by executing a CMP instruction followed by a BEQ instruc-

tion. This sequence can be used for any of the 14 tests.

Compilers use Bcc instructions to implement if statements. First, the comparison is performed; then, if the comparison was false, there’s a branch past the then
Figure A-14.

Branch on condition codes instructions

Instruction

Description

BCC

Branch if carry clear (C flag clear)

BCS

Branch if carry set (C flag set)

BEQ

Branch if equal to (Z flag set)

BGE

Branch if greater than or equal to

BGT

Branch if greater than

BHI

Branch if high (C and Z flags are clear)

BLE

Branch if less than or equal to

BLS

Branch if low or same (C or Z flag set)

BLT

Branch if less than (also sandwich)

BMI

Branch if minus (N flag set)

BNE

Branch if not equal to (Z flag clear)

BPL

Branch if plus (N flag clear)

BVC

Branch if overflow clear (V flag clear)

BVS

Branch if overflow set (V flag set)

339

340

Appendix A

clause to the else clause, if any. Conditional branches after CMP instructions are
also used in testing loop boundaries.

_

Comparison is backward.

When reading code with CMP instructions fol-

lowed by conditional branches, note that the source operand is compared to

_ the destination. This ¢means that conditional branches appear to have the

CMP.B #24,Do- ; compare |theSe byte irin DO to #24
BGTlabel

—;

branch if D0 > 24

7 Although the immediate value 24is written before the DO, the greater-than
comparison in the BGT instruction. compares them the other way, (DO > 24).
Be sure you!follov s this rule when you're looking at conditional instructions.

There’s a more sophisticated form of conditional branch, called DBcc (decrement and branch). This single instruction actually performs three functions. First,

it tests a condition; if the condition is false, a given data register is decremented, and

if the data register is not equal to — 1, the branch is taken. If the initial condition is
true or if the decremented data register equals — 1, no branch is taken, and the next
instruction is executed. This means you can have a loop that can be terminated in

two ways: either the condition is true or the data register’s value goes below zero.
This instruction can be used by compilers to optimize loops. The conditions for

the branch can be any of the 14 listed for Bcc, plus two more: DBT (decrement and
branch until true), which will always fail the conditional test, and DBF (decrement

and branch until false), which will always cause the branch to be taken. Since this
condition is always taken, it’s usually written as DBRA (decrement and branch
always). This means that the only thing that can terminate the loop is the data
register going below zero. The DBRA instruction is by far the most commonly used.

The third and last conditional instruction is Scc (set byte conditionally). This
instruction tests a given condition. If the condition is true, the byte specified as an

operand is set to all ones ($FF); if the condition is false, the byte is set to all zeros
($00). In addition to the standard 14 conditions, there’s an ST (set if true) instruction
that always sets the operand to all ones, and an SF (set if false) instruction that
always sets the operand to all zeros.

The first unconditional instruction is BSR, branch to subroutine. This instruction causes an unconditional branch to the specified location, but before branching,
it saves the address of the next instruction. This allows the called routine to return

Assembly Language Overview

to the caller by executing an RTS (return from subroutine) instruction, which is
discussed later.
Another unconditional instruction very similar to BSR is JSR, jump to subroutine. Like BSR, JSR saves a return address that is used later when the called routine

does an RTS. In fact, the only difference between these two subroutine-calling
instructions is the available addressing modes for the operand. The JSR instruction
allows the effective address to be specified with any of several addressing modes,

including address register indirect, program counter relative, short and long absolute, and several others. The BSR instruction always takes a program counter
relative displacement, either a byte-sized value (called a short branch) or a wordsized value (called a long branch.) On the 68020 and later models, you can also use

a long word as the size of a branch.

Most compilers implement procedure and function calls as JSR instructions.
Some compilers will automatically use a BSR if it’s available and if it’s more efficient
than the equivalent JSR.
The third unconditional instruction is similar to the Bcc instructions. It’s the
BRA (branch always, or unconditional branch) instruction. This instruction is used

to cause a branch to another location in the program without any conditions.
Unlike the BSR and JSR instructions, this instruction does not save a return address,

so it’s used to transfer control without returning.
The fourth and last unconditional instruction, like the BRA instruction, causes

an unconditional branch without a return. This instruction is JMP (jump). Again,
the only difference between these two instructions is the set of available addressing
modes. The JMP instruction allows the same set of addressing modes as JSR, including address register indirect and program counter relative, while BRA takes a
program counter relative displacement, which can be a byte (short jump) or a word
(long jump). Once again, you can use a long word for the displacement on the
68020 and later versions.

Many compilers use the BRA instruction to force a branch to the else clause of
an if statement. The BRA instruction is also frequently used in implementing loops.
The JMP instruction is used in a Macintosh system data structure called the jump
table, used for cross-segment communication.

The 68000 also defines a return instruction that is used frequently in compiled
object code. This instruction is RTS, return from subroutine. The RTS instruction is
used to return to a routine that called another routine with a BSR or JSR.
The BSR and JSR instructions save the address of the following instruction,
called the return address, on the stack before jumping to the new location. Then,
when the called routine executes an RTS, the saved address is pulled from the stack

341

342

Appendix A

and placed into the program counter. In compiled high-level language code, procedures and functions end with an RTS, which causes control to return to the
instruction immediately following the JSR or BSR.
The program control instructions are summarized in Figure A-15.
Figure A-15.

Program control instructions

Instruction

Description

Bcc

Branch on condition codes

DBcc

Test condition, decrement counter, and branch on condition codes

Scc

Set byte on condition codes

BRA

Branch always

BSR

Branch to subroutine

JMP

Jump

JSR

Jump to subroutine

RTS

Return from subroutine

System control instructions
The system control instructions are operations that affect the state of the system.

Only one of these instructions normally appears in compiled object code: the CHK
(check register) instruction.

The CHK instruction is used if the compiler has a range-checking feature, like
the $R + option in MPW Pascal. Range checking verifies that values are within legal
ranges; for example, it checks to see that a value declared in Pascal as 0..1000 is
actually within that range. On the 68000, range checking is implemented with the
CHK instruction.
The CHK instruction takes two operands. The first (source) specifies the effec-

tive address that holds the maximum allowable value. The second operand isa data

register that holds the value to be checked. If the value in the data register is less
than zero or is greater than the value in the source operand, the 68000 generates a

check exception. On the Macintosh, this exception is reported as a system error 5;

if a debugger is installed, the debugger takes control.

Summary
This isn’t a complete list of 68000 instructions, but it covers the instructions that are

generated by most Pascal and C compilers on the Macintosh. When you're debugging, you should have a copy of the microprocessor’s programmer's reference

Assembly Language Overview

manual so that you can see exactly what an instruction or addressing mode does. If
you see an instruction that’s not discussed in this section, you can look it up in the

manual.

For lots more information on the code that compilers put out, see Chapters 5
and 6. If you want to learn more about assembly language, you should get a tutorial

book on the subject.

343

A

P

PEN

DIX

B

Common Problems
This appendix gathers together some common, easy-to-create problems that can

kill your program. They’re listed by problem, not by symptom, since almost all of
them can cause almost any crash imaginable. For each gotcha listed here, we
discuss what you have to do to cause the problem, explain exactly why the problem

occurs, and then tell how to avoid the situation.

Nested procedure pointers
There are lots of ROM routines that take a procedure pointer (procPtr) as a param-

eter. For example, ModalDialog takes a parameter of type procPtr, which is a
pointer to the dialog's filter procedure; the TrackControl call takes a pointer to a
control's action procedure; the Window Manager's DragGrayRgn function also

calls an action procedure, given a procedure pointer.
In MPW Pascal, these calls usually look something like this:
ModalDialog

(@myFilter, itemHit)

In this example, myFilter is the name of the filter procedure, which is declared
somewhere else in the program.

Since myFilter is only called by ModalDialog, you might be tempted to be a
disciplined programmer and nest myFilter’s declaration within the procedure that
calls ModalDialog, like this:

345

346

Appendix B

procedure CallDialog;

function myFilter

(the Dialog:

theEvent:EventRecord;

DialogPtr;

var itemHit:

var
Integer):

Boolean;

begin

{whatever myFilter does}
end;
begin

{function myFilter}

{procedure CallDialog}

ModalDialog
end;

(@myFilter, itemHit)
;

{procedure CallDialog}

This looks like a good idea: since CallDialog is the only place that myFilter will

be referenced, nesting its declaration within CallDialog makes sure that no other
procedures can call it.
Unfortunately, the compiler is playing hidden tricks on you again. One feature
of nested procedures and functions is that they’re able to access the outer procedure’s local variables. To do this, the compiler pushes an extra long word on the
stack when it calls the inner routine. This extra long word, called a static link,

allows the inner routine to find the outer routine’s locals.
When procPtr-passed routines are called, they're called by ROM routines

(ModalDialog calls myFilter, for example). These ROM routines know nothing
about the compiler’s static link; they just create a standard stack frame by pushing
the parameters and then calling the routine.
If the called routine’s declaration was nested, the compiled code will have been
generated assuming that the static link will be on the stack. This will screw up all
references to parameters in the routine—they’ll be off by 4 bytes, the size of the
static link. Any possible death of the system may result.
The fix: don’t nest declarations of routines passed by procPtr.

Implicit dereferencing in with statements
As we discussed in depth in Chapter 2, MPW Pascal will sometimes implicitly

dereference a handle. In a statement like this,
with myHdl** do begin {saves a copy of pointer to the record
that myHdl
myNum

:=

aHandle

10;

{myNum is

:= GetResource

a

(‘DAVE’,

{GetResource can cause
myBool

end;

:= true;

{with}

is

a handle to}

field of

the

record}

27);

compaction}

{saved pointer to the record may be

invalid!}

Common Problems

the apparently safe double-dereferenced handle causes the compiler to save a
pointer in a register for optimization. This means that if there are any statements in
the body of the with statement that can cause heap objects to move, like the

GetResource call, this pointer may become invalid, since the object it points to may
have moved.
The fix: try to keep compaction-causing calls out of with statements that look

like this; otherwise, before executing the compaction-causing call, call MoveHHi
on the record whose handle is being double-dereferenced in the with statement
and then HLock it, like this:
MoveHHi
HLock

(myHd1);

(myHdl);

Be sure to HUnlock it right after the compaction-causing call.

Implicit dereferencing in procedure calls
This is another one that’s discussed in Chapter 2. If you pass a double-dereferenced
handle as a procedure parameter, and that parameter is a VAR parameter or a

parameter larger than 4 bytes (in other words, it’s passed by pointer), and the

procedure called is in another segment that must be loaded from disk, you could
have problems. Here’s an example:

SetToZero (myHdl”*.myNum)

In this example, the parameter is declared by SetToZero to be a VAR parameter,
and SetToZero is in another segment. So, by the time the segment containing
SetToZero is loaded, the object that myHd1] is a handle to may have been relocated,
and the pointer passed on the stack may be invalid.

The fix: don’t pass double-dereferenced handles as procedure parameters,
unless you want to be responsible for ensuring that (1) the parameter isn’t a VAR
parameter, (2) the parameter isn’t larger than 4 bytes, and (3) the called procedure

isn’tin another segment. Instead, copy the parameter into a variable before making
the call, like this:
localNum := myHdl”
SetToZero

.myNum;

(localNum);

This way, you're safe, because localNum is a stack object and can’t move.

347

348

Appendix B

Implicit dereferencing in function calls
Once again, this problem was discussed in Chapter 2. If you assign a function result
to a double-dereferenced handle and the function is in another segment, you could
wind up in deep trouble with a bad pointer. In this call
myHdl**.myNum := SomeFunction (anyParam)

the compiler generates code that constructs a pointer to the variable on the left side
and then calls the function. If the function is in another segment, or if there are any
relocation-triggering calls in the function, memory compaction could occur, and
the pointer could be left pointing into space.

The fix: don’t assign function results to double-dereferenced handles, unless

you want to be sure that the function called isn’t in another segment and that there
are no relocation-triggering calls in the function. The safest thing to do is to call the
function with a variable and then assign that variable to the desired record field,
like this:
localNum

:=

SomeFunction

(anyParam)
;

myHdl**.myNum := localNum;
Since localNum is on the stack and can’t move, this method avoids the problem.

Register A5 at interrupt time
Register A5 is an important global pointer that’s used to find several system data
structures, including all the application’s global variables, the QuickDraw global
variables (thePort, the cursor arrow, the patterns black and white, etc.), and the
jump table. If you have code that executes in response to an interrupt, A5 may be
invalid, since the routine that was interrupted may have preserved its value while

using the register for something else. A problem like this can be extremely hard to
find, since A5 will sometimes be valid. It all depends on what code was interrupted.

Because the “real” value A5 is so important, ROM routines that use A5 save its
value in the global called CurrentA5 at $904. If you have a routine that executes at

interrupt time, be sure that you preserve A5, load A5 from CurrentA5, and then

restore A5 before exiting. Unfortunately, even this doesn’t always work. If your

code depends on something in the A5-world of a “host” application, like a global
variable, and your code executes in response to an interrupt, you might get called
when another application is switched in under System 7 of MultiFinder, which
means that CurrentA5 will contain a valid A5, all right, just not the one you need!

Common Problems

If all your code ever does is look for QuickDraw globals, you'll probably never
notice this discrepancy, but you'll be in big trouble if you go looking for your

application’s globals. To get around this problem, you need to create an extended
parameter area for your interrupt-time code and preserve your favorite value of A5

there.
The fix: you can use CurrentA5 if all you need is an A5 that’s valid for some

application. If you need a specific application’s A5, you'd better do it yourself.

Relying on handles at interrupt time
Code that executes in response to an interrupt may be called after virtually any task

has been interrupted. For example, a heap compaction may be taking place when
the interrupt occurs, calling your routine.

What if your routine has a handle to the object that’s being relocated? The state

of the object may be invalid; it’s right in the middle of being moved! If you’re
writing code that executes at interrupt time, such as a VBL task or an I/O comple-

tion routine, you can’t rely on handles being valid, since their objects might be in
the middle of a relocation. This is the only time that a master pointer might be
invalid.

The only way around this problem is to ensure that any handles you might

need in your interrupt-time routine are locked. You can’t lock them in the routine
itself; it’s too late by then.
The fix: don’t rely on handles being valid at interrupt time, unless the handles
are to locked objects.

Calling the ROM at interrupt time
Interrupt-time code may be interrupting the Memory Manager while it’s allocating

a new object. Because of this, interrupt-time code can’t call the Memory Manager to
allocate new objects.

A more general problem is lack of reentrancy; that is, what happens if a ROM
routine, say PackBits, is interrupted, and the interrupt-time code calls PackBits?

What if the original, interrupted PackBits call was keeping a temporary value ina

system global location? The PackBits called from the interrupt-time code might
destroy that value, and the original, interrupted call would be messed up.
In practice, this doesn’t happen too much, because most ROM routines don’t
change system globals that often; instead, they keep their variables in stack frames,
which are preserved if the routine is interrupted. The ROM routines’ level of
reentrancy is not well explored. The only hard rule is that interrupt-time code must

349

390

Appendix B

not make any Memory Manager calls that rely on a consistent heap zone; most calls
do rely on the heap zone being good.
This also means that interrupt-time code may not call any ROM routines that
call the Memory Manager, for the same reason. There’s a list of ROM routines that
are no-nos at interrupt time in Inside Macintosh.
The fix: interrupt-time code can’t make Memory Manager calls; it also can’t call
ROM routines that call the Memory Manager; it should be cautious about calling
any ROM routines at all, since the routine called may have been interrupted and
may not be reentrant.

Calling UnloadSeg with a routine in the same segment
When you call UnloadSeg, the ROM expects the parameter to be a pointer to a
routine in another segment. How are routines referenced from other segments?

Cross-segment references are really pointers to entries in the jump table. Consider
this source and object code:
ProciInOtherSeg;

{

JSR address(A5)

}

As we saw in Chapter 6, calls to routines in other segments produce A5-relative
JSRs. These are really JSRs to entries in the jump table, which is located above A5.

UnloadSeg expects its parameter to be a jump table entry, as in this call:
UnloadSeg

(@ProcInOtherSeg);

{

PEA address(A5)

{

_UnloadSeg

}

}

The effective address that’s pushed on the stack by the PEA instruction is the

address of ProcInOtherSeg’s jump table entry. When UnloadSeg gets control, it
starts doing all the stuff needed to unload the segment: unlocking it, marking the
jump table entries unloaded, and so on.
What if you inadvertently call UnloadSeg on a routine in the same segment?

Same-segment routines look like this:
ProcInSameSeg;

{

JSR

address(PC)

}

You might remember from Chapter 6 that same-segment calls produce
PC-relative JSRs, like this one. So a same-segment UnloadSeg would look like this:
UnloadSeg

(@ProcInSameSeg);

{

PEA address(PC)

{

UnloadSeg

}

}

Common Problems

The address that’s pushed here isn’t a jump table entry
— it’s the actual address
of the procedure! UnloadSeg won’t know the difference, unfortunately. It will
assume that the address is really a jump table entry. You'd think that this would

cause a disaster, but not so. The UnloadSeg routine is smart enough to do one
reality check before it unloads the segment. It checks to see that the word pointed

to by the parameter passed to it is $4EF9, which is the opcode for the JMP instruction. If it’s not $4EF9, UnLoadSeg assumes that this is a segment that is already
unloaded and returns without doing anything.
Since JMP instructions almost never occur in application code, this “feature” of
UnloadSeg will render most inadvertent same-segment calls harmless. This just
makes these errors harder to find. The easiest way to catch them is with a Discipline

feature in a debugger (see Chapter 4).
The fix: calling UnloadSeg with a procedure that’s in the same segment usually

does nothing at all, but you should still avoid doing it, of course.

Patching traps that are already patched
Many applications like to customize the function of one or more of the Macintosh
ROM traps. For example, a program that wants to monitor its usage of

NewHandle

might patch the NewHandle call so that it can execute its own code before calling

the ROM. The system provides the GetTrapAddress and SetTrapAddress calls to
help you do this.

There are four ways you can handle patches: (1) you can execute your code (a

prolog) and then call the original routine; (2) you can call the original routine first
and then execute your code (an epilog); (3) you can start with your own code,
execute the original routine and then some more of your own code; or (4) you can
ignore the original routine entirely, using only your own code. Which of these you
choose depends on exactly what you want to do.
The technique for running your code first is obvious: just use SetTrapAddress
to point to your code and then jump to the original routine when you're done. To
run the original first and then your code, you can JSR to the original routine; when
it ends with an RTS, it will come back to your code. This technique looks like this:
Patch

JSR origAddr

swe got this

address with GetTrapAddress

{patch is here};RTS at end of original returns here

Some “‘ROM” calls are already patched so that bugs in ROM can be fixed in
RAM. You might think that patching these traps is no problem, as long as you're
sure to call the original routine whose address you got with GetIrapAddress. This
isn’t always the case.

351

352

Appendix B

Some traps are patched in a strange and clever way. In some cases, instead of
patching a given trap, Apple patched a trap that was called by the trap with the bug.
Here’s an example. MenuSelect has a bug: it should be incrementing a global value,
and it's not doing so. Just one additional line of code, ADDQ.W #4,$9FA, would fix
the problem. To do this, though, we’d have to replace the entire MenuSelect routine, which is over 700 bytes long. That would cost a significant amount of disk
space and RAM.

While it’s executing, MenuSelect calls InsetRect. Instead of spending over 700
bytes to patch MenuSelect, we'll do this: we'll patch InsetRect. In the InsetRect
patch, we'll examine the return address on the stack to determine if we were called
by MenuSelect. If so, we'll apply the fix; if not, we'll just jump back to the ROM.
Ingenious! Total size of the patch: 18 bytes. It looks like this:
CMPI.L #40CB92,(A7)

;called from this address

BNE.S

no,

goBack

;

ADDQ.W #4,S9FA

goBack JMP

$40718C

;

in MenuSelect?

return to ROM now

yes,

do the

;go to original

fix

InsetRect in ROM

This technique is used for many ROM patches. It can cause problems if you

attempt to put in your own patches. If you're trying to put in an epilog, you push
your return address on the stack and then call the original patch. If it’s one like the
InsetRect patch, it will look at the return address on the top of the stack, but instead
of seeing the ROM address that called it, it sees the return address to your patch.
Even if it were really called by MenuSelect, it won't be able to tell.
If you want to add an epilog, the only safe way to patch a trap that’s already
patched is to look at the patch with a debugger and see if it looks at the stack fora
return address to ROM. If not, you're probably OK. If it does, you'll need to duplicate the functionality of the existing patch in your patch. Just add the code that’s
already there and then execute your code.

Adding a prolog to a trap that's already patched is no problem, since you don’t
modify the stack.
The fix: to add an epilog to a trap that’s already patched, look at the existing

patch; if it examines the stack for a return address, you'll need to duplicate its code
in your custom patch.

Common Problems

Disposing of system objects
The Operating System and Toolbox create various heap objects that you use in

your application. For example, if you use TextEdit, there’s a TextEdit scrap that

holds cut or copied information from a TextEdit record. Another system object is

the information pointed to by AppParmHandle, which the Finder sets up when it
launches an application.
Be sure you don’t call DisposHandle to get rid of these objects! The system

expects these objects to be around and isn’t always robust about checking to see if
they’ve been destroyed. If you call DisposHandle on them, you'll find your system
crashing in extremely bizarre ways. Often your application will seem to run OK,

but the system will crash after you’ve returned to the Finder. The rule of thumb is

this: if you didn’t directly allocate the object, don’t dispose of it.
The fix: don’t dispose of heap objects that you didn’t allocate.

353

A

P

PEN

DI

Xx

C

Ancient History
This book is old, old, old—not this lovely new edition, of course, which is as fresh
as today’s hockey scores—but the original musty edition, which appeared in 1986.
This appendix contains information that was in the previous editions and is still
true, but isn’t as vital as it used to be. Since it's still true (and probably will be
forever), I hated to throw it away, but since it’s only important historically, I’ve
hidden it back here in this appendix where no one will find it. There are two

subjects addressed here: the Macintosh Plus, which was state-of-the-art in 1986,
and the dreaded segment clotting problem. I hope you find them interesting, or at
least amusing.

Macintosh Plus
This section was originally presented as a separate appendix in the first edition of
this book.

In January 1986, Apple introduced the Macintosh Plus. This computer differs
from its predecessor, the Macintosh 512K, in several ways. The most important
changes are:

e

Macintosh 512K had 64K bytes of ROM; Macintosh Plus has 128K bytes of

ROM. This new ROM implements bug fixes, performance enhancements, and

new features. Also, some frequently used system resources are now in ROM.

395

356

Appendix C

e

Macintosh Plus has 1 megabyte of RAM asa

standard feature, expandable to 4

megabytes with high-density RAM chips.
e

Macintosh 512K had a built-in 400K, single-sided disk drive; Macintosh Plus
has a built-in disk drive that holds 800K bytes on double-sided disks. Both
computers can support an external drive: 400K for the Macintosh 512K, 400K or
800K for the Macintosh Plus.

e

Macintosh Plus has an expanded keyboard that includes a built-in numeric pad
and arrow keys.

e

Macintosh Plus has a built-in SCSI (small computer system interface) port for

connection to third-party devices, especially hard disks.
You can get an upgrade kit from Apple to convert your Macintosh 128K or 512K
into a Macintosh Plus. Everything in this book that applies to a Macintosh Plus is
also applicable to an upgraded Macintosh 128K or 512K.
The rest of this appendix is a very brief discussion of the ROM, piece by piece,
with highlights of the changes anda listing of new calls. We'll distinguish between

the two ROMs by calling them the “original ROM” and the “Macintosh Plus
ROM.” You may also hear the original ROM referred to as the “64K ROM,” the “old
ROM,” and by its version number, which is version $69. The Macintosh Plus ROM
is also called the “128K ROM,” the “new ROM,” and its official version number,

$75. The ROM version number is a byte at location ROMBase + 9 ($400009).
Because the Macintosh Plus has space for many more traps (see Trap Dis-

patcher, which follows), not all trap numbers were used by ROM calls. Many of

these leftover calls were used by Apple as vectors to core routines in the ROM to
facilitate patching these routines if bugs were discovered. Since these calls aren’t
generally useful and since their interface isn’t guaranteed, they probably won't be
documented by Apple. Because they aren’t documented, they may change in the

future, so you should use them at your own risk.

Trap dispatcher
Under the original ROM, there is a table of trap addresses at $400-7FF. This table is
used to figure out what address to go to when the system encounters a trap. To save
space, each address is packed into a single word (2 bytes).
The Macintosh Plus ROM does not pack the addresses in the trap dispatch
table; each one takes 4 bytes and is an actual address. This makes the trap dispatch
table larger, but simplifies and speeds up the dispatching code.
Although the trap dispatching mechanism provides for a bit in the trap word to

distinguish between Toolbox and Operating System traps (bit 11), the original
ROM does not use this bit. For example, the trap word for the OS call MoreMasters

Ancient History

is $A036 (called “trap number $36”). In theory, there should be a corresponding
Toolbox trap number $36 with bit 11 set: $4836. However, to save space in the trap

dispatch table under the original ROM, bit 11 is ignored; each trap number is either
a Toolbox trap or an OS trap, but not both, so there is no trap $A836.
On the Macintosh Plus, bit 11 of the trap word is used to distinguish between
Toolbox and OS traps. Each trap number may have both an OS trap and a Toolbox
trap associated with it. For example, the Macintosh Plus defines $A036 as More-

Masters, and it also defines a Toolbox trap number $36, the new QuickDraw call
GetMaskTable, which is $A836.

Since there are now 512 different Toolbox traps ($0-1FF) and 256 different OS
traps ($0-FF), the size of the trap dispatch table is (512 + 256) entries * 4 bytes per

entry, or 3072 (3K) bytes. To accommodate this, the table has been split into two
pieces: the OS traps at $400-7FF and the Toolbox traps at $CO00-13FF.

Of course, the Macintosh Plus ROM does not change the trap numbers for any
traps that exist in the original ROM. Without this consideration, applications that

were written before Macintosh Plus would have no shot at running on the newer
machine.

Resource Manager
The Resource Manager has benefited from the experience of the hundreds of
Macintosh applications that were written in 1984 and 1985. After the behavior of
lots of Macintosh applications was examined, the Resource Manager was modified
to make it faster, especially for important functions like starting up an application
and updating a resource file. The Resource Manager also uses various caching
techniques to speed things up.
The Resource Manager searches through all open resource files when looking
for a resource. It starts in the current resource file, which is usually the last opened
file; if the requested resource can’t be found in that file, it then searches through the
next file, and so on, until the resource is found or the last opened file has been
searched.

Sometimes you want to search only the current file for a resource and just give
up if it can’t be found there. The Resource Manager now implements a set of calls
to help you do this. These calls are known as “one-deep” calls because they search
only the current resource file. You should use them in any situation in which you're
certain that you want to search only the current file.
Several commonly used resources are now in ROM. This gives you several
benefits: for example, applications run faster, since they don’t have to load these
resources, and there’s more room in RAM that’s not taken up by the ROM-based
resources.

357

358

Appendix C

These resources that used to be loaded from disk are in the Macintosh Plus
ROM:
e

MDEF 0 (text menus)

e

WDEF 0 (standard windows)

e

PACK 4 (SANE)

e

SERD 0 (serial drivers)

PACK5(Elems)

e

DRVR9(.MPP, AppleTalk driver)

e

DRVR 10 (.ATP, AppleTalk driver)

e

DRVR 2 (.Print, printer driver shell)

e

CURS 1, 2, 3, 4 (standard cursors)

e

FONT 12 (system font)

PACK 7 (Binary-Decimal)

In addition, two drivers were present in the 64K ROM that have now become
part of the ROM resource file. This really doesn’t change them functionally. They
are DRVR 4 (.Sony) and DRVR 3 (.Sound).
New calls
Function MaxSizeRsrc

(theResource:Handle):

Longint;

This call determines a resource’s size without having to read the size from the

disk (it does this by looking at the resource map and seeing the difference between
the start of this resource and the next). The resource may actually be smaller than

the number reported by MaxSizeRsrc if the file hasn’t been compacted.
Function RsrcMapEntry

(theResource:Handle):

Longint;

You can use this function to find a resource’s entry in its resource map. The

function result is an offset from the start of the resource map to the desired entry.
This is useful mainly if you're writing resource or file editing utilities, or if you just

want to hack around. Can you do damage with this if you don’t know what you’re
doing? You betcha.

Ancient History

Function OpenRFPerm
permission:

(fileName:

byte;):

Str255;

vRefNum:

Integer;

Integer;

This call is similar to OpenResFile in that it opens a resource file. It provides

more options, though: you can specify a volume or HFS folder with the vRefNum
parameter, and there’s a permission parameter that allows you to specify file
attributes such as read only.

QuickDraw
QuickDraw has also been improved in the Macintosh Plus ROM. Various functions

have been made up to four times faster while retaining compatibility with existing
applications.

Several infamous QuickDraw bugs have been fixed. These include:

e
e

RectlnRgn sometimes returned True even if the rectangle was notin the region
(it checked to see if the rectangle was in the region’s bounding box instead).
Various region calculation calls (SectRgn, UnionRgn, DiffRgn, XorRgn, and
FrameRgn) could cause stack overflows when complex regions were used.

e

e

PtToAngle sometimes didn’t work right if the angle parameter was 90.

CopyBits sometimes destroyed the source bitmap if the source and destination
bitmaps overlapped.

e

Text drawing would cause a stack overflow if a large amount of text was drawn

in a large point size and with a complex style, such as shadowing.
e

DrawText recorded ina

picture did not work correctly if the byteCount param-

eter was greater than 255.

QuickDraw’s text drawing capability has been expanded to allow all eight
transfer modes; previously, only srcOr, srcBic, and srcXor worked.

QuickDraw and the Font Manager have now been enhanced to support fractional pixel spacing for characters. This and other Font Manager enhancements

make bitmapped fonts look better when they're printed.

Picture sizes are now a long word instead of a word. This means that pictures
can be over four gigabytes (if you’ve got the storage, of course). The picSize field of

the picture record contains the low word of the real picture size. To determine a
picture’s true size, you can call GetHandleSize.
New calls
Procedure SeedFill
words:

Integer;

(srcePtr,dstPtr: Ptr;
seedH,seedV:

srcRow,dstRow,height,

Integer);

359

360°

Appendix C

Procedure CalcMask
words:

(srcPtr,dstPtr: Ptr;

srcRow,dstRow,height,

Integer);

These calls provide the foundation for the paint bucket and lasso tools found in
MacPaint. The SeedFill procedure “leaks paint” from the point specified by seedH
and seedV through the source bitmap. It produces a bitmap that will have black bits
in the appropriate places.

The CalcMask procedure can be used to add the capability of MacPaint’s lasso
tool. CalcMask produces a bitmap that has been “lassoed” after scanning the input

bitmap.
Procedure CopyMask

(srcBits,maskBits,dstBits:

srcRect,maskRect,dstRect:

BitMap;

Rect);

This procedure is a variation on CopyBits. It uses another parameter, maskBits,

which “masks” the output bitmap; in other words, only bits that correspond to a
One in maskBits can be set in dstBits.
Procedure MeasureText

(count:

Integer;

textAddr,charLocs: Ptr);

This procedure is similar to TextWidth in that it measures the width of characters; instead of measuring an entire string and adding the results, it puts the width

of each character into an array of integers, pointed to by charLocs. Since this
procedure doesn’t use QuickDraw’s StdText procedure, it can be used only for text

displayed on the screen, not text to be printed.
Function GetMaskTable:

Ptr;

This function returns a pointer to three tables in ROM that can be used as
masks, such as for the CopyMask procedure.

Font Manager
As mentioned previously, the Font Manager now supports fractional character

spacing. Also, a new resource type called FOND has been invented and is used to

specify an entire family of related fonts instead of just one point size.

Ancient History

New calls
Procedure SetFScaleDisable

(scaleDis:

Boolean);

This procedure is used to disable or enable font scaling. It does so by setting or

clearing the low-memory global called FScaleDisable at $AB2. This global also exists
under the original ROM. The SetFScaleDisable call is all that’s new. If scaling is

disabled, text will be drawn in the size that would normally be scaled.
Procedure FontMetrics

(var theMetrics:

FontMetricRec);

{type FontMetricRec = Record
ascent:

Fixed;

descent:

Fixed;

leading:

Fixed;

widMax:

Fixed;

wTabHandle:

Handle;

end;
}

You can use FontMetrics to get information about the current GrafPort’s font,
that is, the font in thePort.

Window Manager
The Window Manager now supports a new feature, zooming windows. This feature appears as a box on the right edge of the title bar. Clicking in this box causes a

window to zoom to full screen size; clicking again sets the window back to the size
it was before zooming. Zooming is supported by

anew WDEF 0 (standard window

definition function) in the ROM and two new calls in the Window Manager.
New calls
Function TrackBox (window:
partCode:

Integer)

:

WindowPtr;

thePt:

Point;

Boolean;

If you create a window with window definition ID 8, the window will have a
zoom box on the right edge of the title bar. If there’s a mouse-down event in this
box, FindWindow will return code 8, which is inZoomOut. If you get this response,

you should call TrackBox with partCode equal to 8. If the user released the mouse

button while it’s still in the zoom box, TrackBox will return True and you should
call ZoomWindow.
If the window has previously been zoomed out, a mouse-down event in the
zoom box will return code 7 (inZoomIn) when you call FindWindow. Calling

361

362

Appendix C

TrackBox with partCode set to 7 will track the mouse, and calling ZoomWindow if
TrackBox returns True will cause the window to be zoomed back to its previous
size.
Procedure ZoomWindow
front:

(window:

WindowPtr;

partCode:

Integer;

Boolean);

If TrackBox returns True, you should call ZoomWindow with the appropriate
part code (inZoomIn or inZoomOut). The front parameter is used to specify if the

window should also be brought to the front. If it’s True, the window will be made
the frontmost; otherwise, its position will not change.

Control Manager
New calls
Procedure UpdateControls
update:

_

(theWindow:

WindowPtr;

RgnHandle);

This procedure draws all the controls in the given window that intersect the

given region. This can be used, for example, to redraw controls ina window whose
contents have just scrolled.

Menu Manager
The AddResMenu and InsertResMenu calls now automatically alphabetize the
resources they get when they build their menus, like the Apple and Font menus, for
example. InsertResMenu alphabetizes within the range that it inserts.
The Menu Manager still doesn’t like purged menus. In the original ROM, the

Menu Manager simply assumed that menus would not be purged. If one was

purged, it wasn’t detected until a future system error, such as an address error,
occurred. In the Macintosh Plus, a purged menu is detected as soon as the system
tries to read it, and a system error 84 (called MenuPrgErr) is generated.
If a menu is too long to fit on the screen when it’s pulled down, the Menu
Manager will draw as many items as it can, up to 19. If the user drags down from the
last item, the menu will scroll up, showing more items at the bottom. Dragging up
from the top item will make the menu scroll back the other way. There’s a new

MDEF0 (standard menu definition procedure) that implements this feature.

Ancient History

New calls
Procedure InsMenuItem
itemNum:

(menuHandle:

Handle;

itemString:

str255;

Integer)
;

This procedure inserts the items specified in the itemString parameter following the item given in itemNum. If the string contains multiple items, they’re
inserted in the reverse of their order in itemString.
Procedure DelMenuItem

(menuHandle:

Handle;

itemNum:

Integer);

Use this procedure to remove an item from the specified menu.

TextEdit
When you create a TextEdit record, there is a field included for you to implement
your own procedure to be called during calls to TEClick, that is, whenever the user
clicks in the text (you put a pointer to this procedure in the clikLoop field). In the
Macintosh Plus, the default behavior for a new TextEdit record implements autoscrolling in the text; thatis, if the user drags the mouse up or down, left or right, past

the edge of the rectangle, the text will automatically scroll in that direction.

Since the ROM updates the text and its display, there’s no way to correctly
update a scroll bar while the user is dragging the mouse. For this reason, the main
use for this feature is to provide autoscrolling in dialogs that have editable text

items and other text that doesn’t have a scroll bar.
New calls
Procedure TEAutoView

(autoView:

Boolean;

hTe:

TEHandle)
;

This procedure sets the TextEdit record’s autoView field. If autoView is false,

autoscrolling is turned off for this record’s default clickLoop; if true, autoscrolling
is enabled. Also, this field enables and disables automatic scrolling to show the
selection in a TextEdit record (see TESelView, which follows).
Procedure TESelView

(hTe:

TEHandle);

Calling TESelView will make sure that the selection is displayed, scrolling if
necessary. It’s called by the default clikLoop if autoView is true.

363

364

Appendix C

Procedure TEPinScroll

(dh,

dv:

Integer;

hTe:

TEHandle);

This procedure is very similar to TEScroll; the only difference is that it stops

scrolling when the last line of text is drawn in the window. Normally, this is the

behavior that you’d want, so you should use this call where you used TEScroll
previously.

Dialog Manager
New calls
Procedure HideDItem

(dialog:

DialogPtr;

itemNo:

Integer);

This procedure can be used to “hide” the specified item in a dialog. It hides the
item by forcing its display rectangle to be off screen. It also erases the item and calls
InvalRect to generate an update event.
Procedure ShowDItem

(dialog:

DialogPtr;

itemNo:

Integer);

Use this procedure to bring back an item that you’ve hidden with HideDItem.
Procedure UpdtDialog

(dialog:

DialogPtr;

updateRgn:

RgnHandle);

Calling UpdtDialog causes all the items that are in the specified region to be
drawn. Before calling this procedure, you should call BeginUpdate, and after calling it, you should call EndUpdate.
Function FindDItem

(dialog:

DialogPtr;

thePoint:

Point):

Integer

You can use this function to find out which item in a dialog contains a given
point. If there’s no item in the dialog that contains the point, FindDItem returns

— 1; otherwise, the function result is the item number that contains the point. The
thePoint parameter must be in local coordinates.

Desk Manager
Under the original ROM, the Desk Manager only passed events 0 through 8 to desk
accessories. The Macintosh Plus passes events 0 through 11 to desk accessories,

which includes networkEvt (10) and driverEvt (11). Event 9 is undefined.

Ancient History

scrap Manager
The Scrap Manager in the Macintosh Plus ROM writes the scrap to the disk spec-

ified by the low-memory global BootDrive at $210 when UnloadScrap is called. If
it's an HFS volume, the scrap is put in the System Folder. The original ROM put the

scrap on the default volume, which is not necessarily the same as BootDrive.

Toolbox utilities
There is nowa set of calls that provides very accurate fixed-point math with num-

bers that have a small absolute value (numbers between — 2 and 2). These numbers
are represented by a type called Fract. This type is 4 bytes long. The highest bit, bit

31, is the sign: 0 for positive, 1 for negative. The next bit, bit 30, represents the
integer portion of the number: 0 or 1. The lowest 30 bits represents the fractional

portion of the number.
The ROM provides two sets of calls to support this type: conversion routines,
which convert between Fract, the SANE type Extended, and the type Fixed; and
math routines.
New calls
Function Long2Fix

(x:

Longint):

Function Fix2Long

(x:

Fixed):

Fix2Frac

(x:

Fixed):

Fract;

Function Frac2Fix

(x:

Fract):

Fixed;

Function

Function Fix2X

(x:

Fixed):

Function X2Fix

(x:

Extended):

Fixed;

Longint;

Extended;
Fixed;

Function Frac2X

(x:

Fract):

Extended;

Function X2Frac

(x:

Extended):

Fract;

These functions all provide the indicated conversions. There’s also a bunch of
calls to perform math on these numbers:
Function FracCos

(x:

Fixed):

Fract;

Function FracSin

(x:

Fixed):

Fract;

Function FracSqrt

(x:

Fract):

Fract;

Function FracMul

(x,

y:

Fract):

Fract;

Function FracDiv

(x,

y:

Fract):

Fixed;

Function FixAtan2
Function

FixDiv

(x,

(x,

y:

y:

Longint):

Fixed):

Fixed;

Fixed;

365

366

Appendix C

Package Manager
The Package Manager now supports 16 packages; the 64K ROM was limited to
eight. The new slots are reserved for future use by Apple. The existing packages
have undergone some changes, and there’s one whole new package, the List
Manager.

Standard File
Standard File now supports the Hierarchical File System, which is in the Macintosh
Plus ROM. Most programmers who were good boys and girls when using Standard
File with the 64K ROM found that their code worked fine with the new Standard

File. The key to this isin Standard File’s reply record. There’s a vVRefNum field in the
reply record, and under HFS.a vRefNum can specify a volume anda folder (subdirectory). Old programs that used this value as a volume reference number in an
Open call generally work fine under HFS.

Binary-decimal conversion
The old-system version of this little package contained calls that converted both
ways between Pascal strings and long integers. The Macintosh Plus version has
been enhanced in two ways: calls have been added and the whole package is now
in ROM.

|

New calls
Procedure PStr2Dec

decimal;

Procedure CStr2Dec

decimal;

(s:

DecStr;

var validPrefix:
(s:

DecStr;

var validPrefix:

var

index:

Integer;

var

d:

index:

Integer;

var

d:

Boolean);
var

Boolean);

These two procedures are used to convert between strings and SANE

decimals.

You should set the index parameter to the first character in the string that you want
the routine to look at. After making this call, index will be set to the first character

after the end of the string that was converted, and validPrefix will be set to true if
the remainder of the string contains a valid SANE decimal.

The first call starts with a Pascal sizing, and the second takes a C string.

Ancient History

Procedure Dec2Str

(f:

DecForm;

This procedure converts a SANE

d:

Decimal;

var

s:

DecStr);

decimal to a Pascal string.

Disk initialization
When you insert a disk to be initialized on a Macintosh Plus, the Disk Initialization

package figures out whether the drive being used is single- or double-sided; if it’s
double-sided, it gives you a choice of formatting the disk as single- or double-sided.
Single-sided volumes have old-style (flat) catalogs. Double-sided disks are formatted with hierarchical catalogs.

List Manager
This new package is used to help you draw and manage lists of data. The resource

editor ResEdit uses the List Manager to draw its lists of files, resource types, and
resources, and to handle their selection and scrolling.

Memory Manager
As we learned way back in Chapter 3, every master pointer contains a byte of flags
that give information about its relocatable object. Only three of these bits are

defined: bit 5, which tells whether the object is a resource; bit 6, which tells if the

object is purgeable; and bit 7, which indicates if the object is locked.
Since the highest byte of a master pointer is used for flags, there’s really only 3
bytes worth of “pointer” in a master pointer. This means that the maximum “‘pointable” address is $FFFFFF, which is 16 megabytes of memory. When the system was

being designed, and 128K RAM was standard, 16 meg probably seemed like a lot;

now, with 4-megabyte Macintosh Pluses making the scene, 16 megabytes is close to
being a real limitation.
To help prepare for the day when the Macintosh will go beyond 16 megabytes
of RAM, the Macintosh Plus implements some new calls designed to allow master

pointers to expand to 4 bytes. The new calls, together with some old ones, allow

programmers to examine and set all the flags in the flags byte without depending
on them being in the master pointer’s high byte.

367

368

Appendix C

It comes as no surprise.

I know this is supposed to be a historical appendix,

re-presented just as it was back at the dawn of time, but I just can’t let this

section go without comment. It certainly sounds hilarious to brag about
“four megabyte Macintosh Pluses making the scene,” but they were pretty
amazing back then. Of course, 16 megabytes is no longer “‘close to being a
real limitation,” as I radically stated years ago. It’s now truly too little for
some applications.

Finally, we all know that wondrous System 7, squeaky-clean ROMs, and

the astonishing Mode32 have broken through the 24-bit address barrier, as

guessedin this section (I had inside information). As you read the rest of this
chapter, remember that we’re talkinghistory here. Thanks for your kind

understanding.

For example, the new call HGetState returns a master pointer’s flags byte. In

the Macintosh Plus, this is simply the master pointer’s high byte; in the future, it
may fetch the flags byte from somewhere else. The important thing to know is that
Apple will ensure that these calls always work; by calling HGetState to find out

about the flags byte instead of trying to access it directly, your code will work on

future systems.

Warning.

Ifyou don’t use these calls to get to the flags byte, and instead rely

on the flags being in the master pointer’s high byte, you'll be sunk if Apple

decides to move the flags byte on future: systems tosupport 32-bit master

pointers.

New calls
Procedure HSetRBit

(h:

Handle);

Procedure HClrRBit

(h:

Handle);

The original ROM defined calls to set and clear the lock bit and the purgeable
bit in a master pointer (HLock, HUnlock, HPurge, HNoPurge). These new calls

allow you to set and clear the other bit in the flags byte, the resource bit. Normally,
you'd never call these routines, since setting and clearing the resource bit is usually

done through the Resource Manager.

Ancient History

Function HGetState

(h:

Procedure HSetState

Handle):

Byte;

Handle,

flags:

(h:

Byte);

These calls are used to examine and modify the flags byte in one chunk. Calling
HGetState gives you a master pointer’s flags byte; bit 5 is the resource bit, bit 6 is the
purgeable bit, and bit 7 is the lock bit. If you want to set one or more of these flags,

you can do so with the HSetState call. These calls are guaranteed always to find the
flags byte, no matter where it might travel to in future systems.

How muchisenough?

Expanding master pointers to 32 bits will allow them

to address up to four gigabytes of memory. Will this seem like a limitation
someday?
eS
a

Function MaxBlock:

Longint;

This function tells you the largest free block that could be created in the heap

before it would be necessary to grow the zone or purge some blocks. If you call
MaxApplZone when your application starts up, this call will tell you the largest
block that's available without doing any purging.
Function PurgeSpace

(var totalSpace:

Longint):

Longint;

This function tells you two things: first, it gives you the total number of purgeable and free bytes in a heap zone (in the totalSpace parameter), and, second, it
returns the maximum possible contiguous space that would be available in the
heap after purging and compacting (in the function result). This function returns

both of these values without actually relocating or purging anything.
Function StackSpace:

Longint;

You can use this call to determine how much space you have remaining on the

stack. The result will be the number of bytes that can be added to the stack before
it would crash into the heap.

In addition to these new calls, the MaxAppIZone and MoveHHi calls, which

were previously available in Pascal glue, are now in the ROM.

369

370

Appendix C

Segment Loader
The Segment Loader has been tweaked in the Macintosh Plus. Now, when Load-

Seg loads a segment, it checks to see if the segment is locked. If it’s not, it calls
MoveHHii on it, trying to move it to the highest part of the heap. Remember that

unloaded segments are unlocked, so LoadSeg in the 128K ROM will always move
segments high when reloading them if they’re sill in memory.

The effect of this is that code segments don’t get locked down in the middle of
the heap anymore, thus solving one of the most difficult of all fragmentation
problems. To benefit from this scheme, you should call MaxApplZone early in your
application so that segments are moved high.

There’s one problem here. By setting the “locked” attribute on CODE
resources, the Memory Manager is smart enough to try to force them low in mem-

ory when they're loaded. This is what you want on 64K ROM systems. But if
segments are marked locked in the resource file, they don’t get moved high when

they're first loaded under the new ROM; if they’re marked unlocked in the file,
they don’t get loaded low under the old ROM.
Remember that LoadSeg checks to see if a segment is locked in memory before

deciding whether to move it high. The effect is that ifa segment’s “locked” attribute
is set it will be loaded low. When you call UnloadSeg on it, it becomes unlocked. The
next time LoadSeg loads it, if it’s still in memory and marked unlocked, it will be

moved high; if it’s been purged, it will be loaded low again.
What should you do? Since the goal with locked relocatable objects is to have
them gathered together at either the low or high end of the heap, having your
CODE segments marked locked is the wisest thing to do.

No matter what technique you use, you should make s sure that CODE 1, the

main segment, is locked.inthe resource file. This is because CODE1 is loaded

.. when the heapis at its default 6K size. If it’s unlockedinthe file and the new.

~ LoadSegis running,it’llbe moved“high” tothe topof the tiny 6K heap. Then, »
as the heap expands, it'llstaywhere it is, never being unlocked and causing.
some
ie fragmentation. oo

_

Ancient History

File Manager
The Macintosh Plus File Manager is the Hierarchical File System. This file system

allows disks to be divided into tree-structured collections of catalogs and subdirectories. In addition to implementing this new functionality, the File Manager sup-

ports all the old “flat” file system calls.

Operating System utilities
The SetTrapAddress and GetTrapAddress calls have some new features to support
the new trap dispatching extensions. Of course, calls in existing applications that
don’t know about the new traps still have to work the same way, but the calls must
also have the power to allow you to specify “Toolbox trap #n” or “Operating

System trap #n,” since trap numbers can now refer to both a Toolbox and an OS
trap, as we discussed at the start of this section.

To do this, GetTrapAddress and SetTrapAddress have defined a couple of new
parameter bits in the trap word. The first, bit 10, lets you specify whether you want
a Toolbox trap or an OS trap. If you want to use this bit explicitly to specify Toolbox

or OS, you must also set bit 9 to show that you're using the new trap numbering.
If bit 9 is zero, the ROM will assume that you're setting a trap according to the
old ROM’s trap numbering; for example, any trap word that refers to trap
number $50 will mean InitCursor, the only trap in the old ROM corresponding
to trap number 50.
New calls
Function RelString(strl,str2:

Str255;caseSens,diacSens:

Boolean):

Integer;

This function is very similar to the CmpString call, which compares two strings
for alphabetical order,but this call tells which string comes first when sorting takes

place, while CmpString just tells if they’re equal.
This call is used to create an ordering that is used for alphabetizing file names,
such as in the Finder’s text views. This ordering does not depend on local rules that
are specified in the international (INTL) resources; it’s always the same. This means

that you should continue to use the International Utilities to sort strings according
to the user’s expectations.

371

372

Appendix C

Macintosh 512K Enhanced. In April 1986, Apple introduced the Macintosh
512K Enhanced. This computer is functionally equivalent to a Macintosh
512K with anew ROM and 800K built-in disk drive. The 512K Enhanced ROM
is identical to the Plus ROM.

Segment clotting
This section was originally presented in Chapter 3 of the first edition of this book.
It talks about the segment clotting problem and how that problem was conquered
in the Macintosh Plus.

You can achieve very good segment management by just calling UnloadSeg on
every segment every time through your main event loop. There is still one subtle

problem that can plague you, though, even if you’ve done a perfect job of segmenting your code and you religiously unload your segments. This is the dreaded
segment clotting problem.

Here’s how it happens: the user chooses a menu item that causes you to calla

routine in an infrequently used segment (let’s call it segment 47) and then return to
the main loop. The main loop unloads the segment and the application continues
running. Since segment 47 is now unlocked, it will be relocated to make space for
new objects. Since new objects tend to be allocated low in memory, segment 47 will
tend to rise in memory to make way for new things (see Figure C-1).
Then, as segment 47 has risen in the heap, the user chooses the menu item

again, and the routine in segment 47 is called again. What does the system do? It
locks segment 47 right where it is in memory. Now you've got a locked relocatable

object right in the middle of your carefully maintained heap, and if you try to
allocate any new objects from routines in segment 47, the heap’s continuous bytes
are fragmented by the locked CODE segment. This is segment clotting.

How do you fix this problem? One thing you can do is to confine your newobject allocation to the main loop. When the main loop is running, all the other
segments are unlocked if you’ve called UnloadSeg on them, and so the heap will
not be fragmented, even if you allocate a new nonrelocatable object.
Note that simply putting your memory allocation code anywhere in the main

segment is not the same as putting it in the main loop. Only in the main loop do you
unload the other segments. Let’s say you create a main segment routine that calls
NewHandle and then call that routine from your other segments to allocate new

objects.

Ancient History

Heap

Heap

Segment
47

Segment
47

ig:

site

Segment 47 is loaded,
used, and unloaded
(with UnloadSeg)
Figure C-1.

Segment 47 "floats"
as new objects are
allocated

Segment clotting

When your outlying segment calls the main segment routine, the outlying

segment remains locked. You can’t unlock it; if you do, the return address to it may
become invalid. So, when the new object is allocated, the heap is still fragmented by

the locked outlying segment. To get a real benefit, the memory allocation must be
done in the main loop, after all the segments have been unloaded. See Figure C-2
for a comparison between these two situations.

Try to do your memory allocation in the main loop when everything else is
unloaded. One neat trick you can do is to allocate a nonrelocatable block the size of

a window record in your main loop; then, if any of your outlying segments needs
anew window, it simply uses the one you've already allocated, setting a flag to say
that it’s been used. Then the next time through the main loop you can allocate
another new one.
If your program's requirements don’t allow you to do your memory allocations

from the main loop, there are some other things you can do. Usually, the clotting
problem is confined to one or two segments in specific situations. You might be able
to rearrange your segmenting so that the circumstances that cause the clotting are
eliminated.

B7D

374

Appendix C

Heap

Heap

New relocatable

object
No room for

Outlying

lian

Outlying

segment

seanent

segment

(locked)

g

(locked)

Allocation

Allocation

routine

routine

Mai

Main

ie

Main

segment

segment

Other.routine.

Other routine

er

IRC euHe

ne

{|_Otherroutine_}

Outlying segments calls

New object will

allocation routine and

cause fragmentation

stays locked

when outlying segment
is unloaded
Heap

Heap

Object

relocated

Outlying
segment
(unloaded,
unlocked)

hee

Outlying

=>

segment

(unloaded,
unlocked)

To
make
space
here

as
New nonrelocatable

object

Main loop

Main loop

includes

allocation
routine
Other routine

Other routine

All allocation is done in

includes

Main
segment

allocation
routine
ven

therroutine

Other routine

Outlying segment is

main loop after calling

unlocked and has been

UnloadSeg on all segments

relocated to make space

for new object, preventing
fragmentation

Figure C-2.

Allocation in main loop versus main segment allocation routine

Main
segmer

Ancient History

Remember that there’s a Memory Manager routine called MoveHHi, which

movesa relocatable block as high as it can go in the heap. Beginning in the Macin-

tosh Plus ROM (which was ROM version 75), there’s a change to the LoadSeg
routine that virtually eliminates the problem of segment clotting. It works like this:

the LoadSeg call now checks to see if the CODE resource is locked when it gets it.
If not, it calls MoveHHii on it before locking it. This means that if you’re careful not

to fragment your heap, CODE segments won't get in the way. MoveHHi was

actually invented specifically to cure this problem.
If your program will be used with very old (pre-Macintosh Plus) Macintoshes,
you can include the LoadSeg with MoveHHi schtick as a patch in your application.
Information on how to do this is in Macintosh Technical Note #39 from Apple.

375

A

P

PEN

DIX

D

Debugging Quick Reference Guide
This appendix is useful for finding out things when you're debugging. There are
three parts to this appendix. First is a list of system globals in low memory, sorted

alphabetically. Next is the same list, but arranged in numerical order. These lists are

useful for observing the low-memory locations when you're tracing a program. In
both lists, the addresses are in hexadecimal.
Please remember that most globals are read-only; that is, you shouldn’t change
them. For your best shot at staying compatible with future versions of the system,

you should just look at system globals when you're debugging, or read from them

if you need a value that can’t be obtained from a high-level call.
The third part of this appendix is a list of common data types used by the ROM.
You can use this to examine data structures in memory while your application is
running.

377

378

Appendix D

System Globals: Alphabetical Listing

Name

Address

Type

Comment

Local variables used by AppleTalk
Number of times this alert called
Address error vector
Bit 7=Apple logo on/off, Bit 6 = beeped, Bit
Active alert ID
Resource ID of application font

ABusVars
ACount
AddrErr
AlarmState
ANumber
ApFontiD

2D8
ASA
Cc
21F
A98
984

8 bytes
Integer
Pointer
Byte
Integer
Integer

App2Packs

BC8

8 Handles

+ handles for Pack8—Pack15

ApplLimit
ApplScratch

130
A78

Pointer
12 Bytes

End of application heap if fully grown
Reserved for use by application

ApplZone
AppPacks

2AA
AB8

Pointer
8 Handles

Start of application heap zone
Handles to PackO through Pack7

AppParmHandle

AEC

Handle

Handle to Finder information on Launch

AtalkHk1

B14

Pointer

+ AppleTalk hook

AtalkHk2

B18

Pointer

+ AppleTalk hook

AtMenuBottom
Autolnt1

B28
64

Integer
Pointer

+ Flag used by scrolling menus
Level 1 interrupt auto-vector

Autolnt2

68

Pointer

Level 2 interrupt auto-vector

Autoint3

6C

Pointer

Level 3 interrupt auto-vector

Autolnt4

70

Pointer

Level 4 interrupt auto-vector

Autolint5

74

Pointer

Level 5 interrupt auto-vector

Autolnt6

78

Pointer

Level 6 interrupt auto-vector

AutolInt7

7C

Pointer

Level 7 interrupt auto-vector

BasicGlob

2B6

Pointer

Basic globals

BootDrive

210

Integer

Drive number of boot drive

BootMask
BootTmp8
BtDskRfn

BOE
B36
B34

Integer
8 Bytes
Integer

+ Used by boot code
+ Temp space needed by StartBoot
+ Refnum of boot disk driver

BufPtr

10C

Pointer

Top of application memory (end of jump table)

BufTgDate

304
302
300
2FC
8

Integer
Integer
Integer
Longint
Pointer

Time stamp
Logical block number
Buffer tag flags
Buffer tag file number
Bus error vector

2F4

Longint

Ticks between caret blinks

18
946

Pointer
Byte

Vector CHK, CHK2 instruction error
Bit 7=0, don’t run; Bit 6=0, gray out AppleTalk

BufTgFBkNum
BufTgFFlg
BufTgFNum
BusError
CaretTime

ChkError
ChooserBits
CkdDB
CloseOrnHook
Coproces
CoreEditVam
CPUFlag
CrsrAddr
CrsrBusy
CrsrCouple
CrsrNew
CrsrObscure
CrsrPin
CrsrRect

O= enabled

340

Integer

Used for searching the directory

A88
34
954

Pointer
Pointer
12 Bytes

Routine called when desk accessories are closed
Vector for coprocessor protocol violation
Core edit variables

12F
888
8CD
8CF

Byte
Pointer
Byte
Byte

+ $00 = 68000, $01 = 68010, $02 = 68020
Screen-memory address covered by cursor
Cursor locked out?
Cursor coupled to mouse?

8CE
8D2

Byte
Byte

Cursor changed?
Cursor obscure flag

834

Rect

Cursor pinning rectangle

83C

Rect

Cursor hit rectangle

+ valid only if ROM85=$7FFF (i.e., Macintosh Plus or newer)

Debugging Quick Reference Guide

Name

Address

Type

Comment

CrsrSave
CrsrScale
CrsrState
CrsrThresh

88C
8D3
8D0
8EC

64 Bytes
Byte
Integer
Integer

Saved data under the cursor
Cursor scaled?
Cursor nesting level
Delta threshold for mouse scaling

CrsrVis
CurActivate

8CC
A64

Byte
Pointer

Cursor visible?
Window that will get/activate event

CurApName
CurApRefNum

CurDeactive

910
900

A68

String[31]
Integer

Pointer

Name of current application
RefNum of application’s resource file

Window that will get/activate event

CurDeKind

A22

Integer

WindowkKind of deactivated window

CurDragAction

A46

Pointer

Implicit actionProc for DragControl

CurFMDenom
CurFMDenom

994
9AE

Point
Point

Current denominator of scale factor
Point for denominators of scale factor

CurFMFace
CurFMFamily

98C
988

Byte
Integer

Current font face
Current font family

CurFMinput
CurFMNeedBits
CurFMNumer
CurFMSize
CurJTOffset

988
98D
990
98A
934

Pointer
Boolean
Point
Integer
Integer

QuickDraw FMinput Record
Does Font Manager need bits?
Current numerator of scale factor
Current font size
Offset from AS to start of jump table

CurMap

A5A

Integer

Reference number of current resource file

CurPageOption
CurPitch

936
280

Integer
Integer

Current page 2 video/sound oonfiguration
Current pitch value

CurrentA5
CurStackBase

904
908

Pointer
Pointer

Correct value of A5
Current stack base

DABeeper
DAStrings

A9C
AAO

Pointer
4 Handles

Beep routine for ModalDialog
ParamText substitution strings

DefitStack

322

Longint

Default size of stack

DeskHook

A6C

Pointer

Routine that will be called to paint the desk

DeskPattern
DiskVars

A3C
222

Pattern
62 Bytes

Desktop pattern
Variables used by .SONY driver

DispatchTab
DigFont
DoubleTime
DragFlag
DragHook

400
AFA
2F0
A44
OF6

1024 Bytes
Integer
Longint
Integer
Pointer

Trap dispatch table (64K ROM)
Default dialog font ID
Allowed ticks between clicks of a double-click
Implicit parameter to DragControl
Routine called during dragging

DragPattern
DrMstrBlk

A34
34C

Pattern
Integer

Dragged by DragTheRgn
Master directory block in a volume (MFS)

DrvOHdr

308

10 Bytes

Header of system’s drive queue

DSAlertRect
DSAlertTab

3F8
2BA

Rect
Pointer

Rectangle for disk-switch alert
System error alerts

DSDrawProc
DSErrCode

334
AFO

Pointer
Integer

Alternate SysError draw procedure
Last system error alert ID

DskErr

142

Integer

Disk routine result code

DskRtnAdr

124

Pointer

Used by disk driver

CurFMDevice

DefVCBPtr

DskSwtchHook
DskVerify
DSWndUpdate
EjectNotify

98E

352

3EA
12C
15D
338

Integer

Pointer

Pointer
Byte
Byte
Pointer

Current font device

Default volume control block

Hook for disk-switch dialog
Used by .SONY driver for read/verify
Used by disk switch hook
Routine called when a disk is ejected

379

380

Appendix D

Name

Address

Type

Comment

ErCode
EventOueue
EvtBufCnt
ExtFSHook

3A2
14A
154
3E6

Integer
10 Bytes
Integer
Pointer

Disk driver async errors
Event queue header
Maximum number of events in SysEvtBuf— 1
Used by external file system

ExtStsDT
FCBSPtr

2BE

16 Bytes
Pointer

SCC ext/sts secondary dispatch table

File system variables
Private Finder flags
Filename of the Finder
Flag used by SetFilLock,RstFilLock

34E

File control blocks

FDevDisable

BB3

Byte

FileVars
Finder
FinderName
FLckUnick

340
261
2E0
348

184 Bytes
Byte
String[15]
Byte

+ $FF to disable device-defined style extra

FIEvtMask

25E

Integer

+ Mask of allowable events to flush at FlushEvents

FlushOnly

346

Byte

Flag used by UnMountVol,FlushVol

FMDefaultSize
FMDotsPerlnch

987
9B2
998

Byte
Point

Default size of Font Record
Dots per inch of current device

FMgrOutRec
FMStyleTab

9B6

Pointer
18 bytes

Quickdraw font output record
Style heuristic table supplied by device

FmtErrVect
FONDID

38
BC6

Pointer
Integer

+ Format error vector for 68010 and 68020
+ID of last font definition record (FOND)

FontFlag
FormatEr
FOutAscent
FOutBold
FOutDescent
FOutError

15E
38
9A5
99E
9A6
998

Byte
Pointer
Byte
Byte
Byte
Integer

Font manager loop flag
Format error vector
Height above baseline
Bolding factor
Height below baseline
Error code

FOutExtra
FOutFontHandle
FOutitalic

9A4
99A
99F

Byte
Handle
Byte

Extra horizontal width
Font bits
Italic factor

FOutLeading

9A8

Byte

Space between lines

FOutNumer
FOutRec
FOutShadow
FOutULOffset

9AA
998
9A3
9A0

Point
Pointer
Byte
Byte

Numerators of scaling factors
Font Manager output record
Shadow factor

9A1

Byte

Underline “halo”

FOutWidMax
FPState
FractEnable
FrcSync
FSBusy
FScaleDisable
FScaleHFact
FScaleVFact
FSQHdr
FSQHead
FSOTail
FSQueueHook

9A7
A4A
BF4
349
360
A63
BF6
BFA
360
362
366
3E2

Byte
6 Bytes
Byte
Byte
Integer
Byte
Longint
Longint
10 Bytes
Pointer
Pointer
Pointer

FSTemp4

3DE
3D6

Longint
8 bytes

Used by File System
Used by File System

20 Bytes

System parameter scratch space

FOutULShadow

FOutUL Thick

FSTemp8
fsVarEnd

GetParam
+ valid only if

9A2

Byte

3F6

1E4

ROM85 =$7FFF

Underline offset
Underline thickness
Maximum width of character
Floating point state
+ Flag for fractional font widths
When set, all File System calls are synched
Nonzero when the file system is busy
Disable font scaling?

+ Horizontal font scale factor
+ Vertical font scale factor
File system queue header
First queued command in File System queue

Last File System queue element
Hook to capture all FS calls

End of file system variables

(i.e., Macintosh Plus or newer)

Debugging Quick Reference Guide

Name

Address

Type

Comment

Pointer
Byte

Window hidden from FrontWindow
Do we have the strike? (Font Manager)
QuickDraw system globals area
End of QuickDraw system globals
Rounded gray desk region
Moving handle for GrowZone
Block that must not be moved by GrowZone function
Root pointer for GrowZone

GhostWindow
GotStrike
GrafBegin
GrafEnd
GrayRgn
GZMoveHnd
GZRootHnd
GZRootPtr

A84
986
800
8F2
9EE
330
328
32C

Pointer

HeapEnd

114

HeapStart
HiHeapMark
lIAZNotify
IconBitmap
illegal

Boo
BAE
33C
AOE
10

Pointer

Pointer
Pointer
BitMap
Pointer

IntFlag
IntlSpec
IWM

15F
BAO
1E0

Byte
Pointer
Pointer

+ Extra international data
IWM base address

JAdrDisk
JBlockMove

252
4B8

Pointer
Pointer

Disk driver vector
+ Vector used by Memory Manager

Handle
Handle
Handle

End of application heap

Start of the system heap (64K ROM)
+ Highest address used by a heap zone below A7
Routine called when application heap is reinitialized
Used by Ploticon
Illegal instruction vector
Reduce interrupt disable time when bit 7 = 0

JControl

242

Pointer

Disk driver vector

JCrsrObscure
JCrsrTask

81C
SEE

Pointer
Pointer

Vector used by QuickDraw
Address of CrsrVBLTask

JDCDReset

B48

Pointer

+ Disk driver vector

JDiskPrime

226

Pointer

Disk driver vector

JDiskSel

B40

Pointer

+ Disk driver vector

JFetch
JFigTrkSpd
JFontinfo

8F4
222
8E4

Pointer
Pointer
Pointer

Fetch a byte routine for drivers
Disk driver vector
Jump entry for FMFontMetrics

JGNEFilter
JHideCursor
JInitCrsr
JlIODone
JKybdTask
JMakeSpdTbl

29A
800
814
8FC
21A
24E

Pointer
Pointer
Pointer
Pointer
Pointer
Pointer

GetNextEvent filter proc
Vector used by QuickDraw
Vector used by QuickDraw

JournalFlag
JournalRef
JRdAddr

8DE
8E8
22A

Integer
Integer

Pointer

Journaling state
Journaling driver’s refnum
Disk driver vector

JRdData
JRecal

22E
23E

Pointer
Pointer

Disk driver vector
Disk driver vector

JReSeek
JScrnAddr
JScrnSize
JSeek
JSendCmd
JSetCrsr
JSetSpeed

24A
80C
810
236
B44
818
256

Pointer
Pointer
Pointer
Pointer
Pointer
Pointer
Pointer

Disk driver vector
Vector used by QuickDraw

JSetUpPoll
JShell

23A
212

Pointer
Integer

Disk driver vector
Journaling shell state

JShieldCursor

808

Pointer

Vector used by QuickDraw

JShowCursor

804

Pointer

Vector used by QuickDraw

JStash

8F8

Pointer

Stash a byte routine for drivers

IODone vector
Keyboard VBL task hook
Disk driver vector

Vector used by QuickDraw

Disk driver vector
+ Disk driver vector
Vector used by QuickDraw
Disk driver vector

+ valid only if ROM85=$7FFF (i.e., Macintosh Plus or newer)

381

382

Appendix D

Name

Address

Type

Comment

JSwapFont

8E0

Longint

Jump entry for FMSwapFont

JUpdateProc
JWakeUp

820
246

Pointer
Pointer

Vector used by QuickDraw
Disk driver vector

JWrData
KbdType
KbdVars

232
21E

216

Pointer
Byte
Longint

Disk driver vector
Keyboard model number
Keyboard driver variables

Key1Trans
Key2Trans
KeyLast
KeyMap

29E
2A2
184
174

Pointer
Pointer
Integer
2 Longints

Keyboard mapping procedure
Numeric keypad mapping procedure
ASCII for last valid keycode
Bitmap showing keys up/down

KeyMVars

B04

Integer

+ ROM KEYM procedure variables

KeypadMap
KeyRepThresh
KeyRep Time
KeyThresh
KeyTime

17C
190
18A
18E
186

Longint
Integer
Longint
Integer
Longint

Bitmap for numeric pad—18 bits
Key repeat speed
Tickcount when key was last repeated
Threshold for key repeat
Tickcount when last keystroke was received

LastFOND
LastLGlobal
LastPGlobal
LastSPExtra
LaunchFlag

BC2
944
954
B4C
902

Handle

+ Last font definition record (FOND)
Last Segment Loader global
Last Printing Manager global

Longint
Byte

+ Most recent value of space extra
Used by Launch and Chain

LGrafJump

824

Pointer

Line 1010
Line 1111

Vector used by QuickDraw

28
2C

Pointer
Pointer

1010 emulator trap (vector for A-traps)
1111 emulator trap (reserved)

Lo3Bytes

31A

LoaderPBlock
LoadTrap

93A
12D

LoadVars

Longint

Constant $OOFFFFFF

10 Bytes
Byte

parameter block for ExitToShell
If nonzero, enters debugger before entering new segment

900

Lvi1DT

68 Bytes

192

Segment Loader variables

32 Bytes

Lvi2DT

32 Bytes

Interrupt level 1 dispatch table

MAErrProc

1B2

BE8

MaskBC
MASuperTab

Pointer

MBarEnable
MBarHeight

31A
BEC

Longint
Handle

A20
BAA

MBarHook

Integer
Integer

A2C

Pointer

172
16E
220

Byte
Longint
Integer

108
A24
A30

Pointer
Integer
Pointer

MBState
MBTicks
MemeErr
MemTop

MenuFlash
MenuHook

MenuList
MicroSoft
MinStack
MinusOne

MMDefFlags
MmInOK

MonkeyLives
MouseMask
MouseOffset
+ valid only if

AiC
A78
31E
A06

Handle
12 bytes
Longint
Longint

326

Integer

12E

Byte

100
8D6
8DA
ROM85 =$7FFF

Integer
Point
Point

Interrupt level 2 dispatch table

+MacApp error procedure

Memory Manager byte count mask (also called Lo3Bytes)
+MacApp superclass table

menuBar enable for desk accessories
+ Height of menu bar (usually 20)

User hook before MenuHook

Current mouse button state
Tickcount at last mouse button
Last memory manager error
Top of RAM

Flash feedback count
User hook during menuSelect

Current menuBar list structure
Old name for AppIlScratch
Minimum size of stack
Constant $FFFFFFFF

Default zone flags

Initial memory mgr checks ok?

Monkey tester in use if >= 0
Mask for ANDing with mouse
Offset for adding after ANDing

(i.e., Macintosh Plus or newer)

Debugging Quick Reference Guide

Name

MrMacHook
MTemp

NewMount
NibiTbl
OldContent
OldStructure
OneOne

Address

Type

Comment

A2C
828

Pointer
Longint

34A
25A
9EA

Integer
Pointer
Handle

Old name for MBarHook
Low-level interrupt mouse location

Used by MountVol to flag now mounts
Used by disk driver
Saved content region

9E6
A02

Handle
Longint

Saved structure region
Constant $00010001

PaintWhite

9DC

Integer

Params

3A4

50 bytes

Pointer

SCC poll data procedure

PollRtnAddr
PollStack

128
13A

Pointer
Pointer

“Other” driver locals
SCC poll data start stack location

PollProc

13E

PortAUse
PortBUse
PrintErr
PrintVars
Privileg
PWMBuf1
PWMBuf2
PWMValue
QDExist

290
291
944
944
20
BOA
312
138
8F3

Byte
Byte
Integer
16 Bytes
Pointer
Pointer
Pointer
Integer
Byte

RAMBase
RawMouse
RegRsrc

2B2
82C
347

Pointer
Point
Byte

Erase newly drawn windows?
Used by Device Manager for I/O parameter blocks

Bits 0-3: port type; bit 7: 0 = in use
Port B use, same format as PortAUse
Current print error
Print code variables
Privilege violation vector
+ PWM buffer pointer
PWM buffer 1 (or 2 if sound)
Current PWM value
QuickDraw is initialized if zero
Lowest address for trap routines in RAM
Unjerked mouse coordinates
Flag used by File Manager

ReaqstVol
ResErr

3EE
A60

Pointer
Integer

VCB of off-line or external volume
Resource Manager error code

ResErrProc
ResetSPPC
ResLoad
RestProc
ResumeProc
RgSvArea
RMGRPerm
RndSeed

AF2
0
ASE
A8C
A8C
36A
BA4
156

Pointer
8 bytes
Integer
Pointer
Pointer
38
Byte
Longint

Routine called whenever Resource Manager error occurs
Reset vector
Load resources on GetResource if nonzero
Old name for ResumeProc
Resume procedure for system errors
Register save area used by system
+ Permission byte for OpenResFile
Random number seed

ROMBase
RomFont0

2AE
980

Pointer
Handle

Start of ROM
System font

ROMMapHndl
RomMaplInsert
SavedHandle

BO6
B9E
A28

Handle
Byte
Handle

+ROM resource file’s map
+$FF = lookin ROM resource file, $00 = don't look in ROM
Saved bits under a menu

SaveProc

Ag0

Pointer

Address of Save failsafe procedure

SaveSegHandle
SaveSP
SaveUpdate
SaveVisRgn
SCCASts
SCCBSts
SCCRd

930
A94
9DA
9F2
2CE
2CF
1D8

Handle
Longint
Integer
Handle
Byte
Byte
Pointer

SCCWr
ScrapCount
ScrapEnd

1DC
968
980

Pointer
Integer

CODE resource 0 (used by Launch)
Safe SP for restart or save
Enable window update accumulation?
Temporarily saved visRegion
SCC read reg 0 last ext/sts rupt—A
SCC read reg 0 last ext/sts rupt—B
SCC base read address
SCC base write address
Count changed by ZeroScrap

ROM85

28E

Integer

+$FFFF = 64K ROM, $7FFF = 128K ROM or newer

End of scrap variables

+ valid only if ROM85 =$7FFF (i.e., Macintosh Plus or newer)

383

384

Appendix D

Name

Address

Type

Comment

ScrapHandle
ScrapInfo

964
960

Handle
Longint

Desk scrap
Old name for ScrapSize

ScrapName
ScrapSize

ScrapState

96C
960

96A

Pointer
Longint

Scrap file name
Length of desk scrap

ScrapTag

970

String[15]

Scrap file name

ScrapVars

960

32 Bytes

Scrap manager variables

scratch20
scratch8
ScrDmpEnb
ScrDmpType
ScreenRow

1E4
OFA
2F8
2F9
106

20 Bytes
8 Bytes
Byte
Byte
Integer

Application scratch area
Application scratch area
Screen dump enabled if nonzero
$FF dumps screen, $FE dumps front window
rowBytes of screen

ScrHRes
ScrnBase
ScrVRes
SCs!Drvrs
SCSIFlag
SdVolume
SegHiEnable
SerialVars

104
824
102
B2E
B22
260
BB2
2D0

Integer
Pointer
Integer
Integer
Integer
Byte
Byte
16 Bytes

Screen horizontal dots per inch
Base address of screen
Screen vertical dots per inch
+ Bitmap for loaded SCSI drivers
+ Configuration flag for SCSI
Global volume control
+0 to disable MoveHHi in LoadSeg
Async driver variables

SEvtEnb
SFSaveDlsk
SonyVars
SoundActive

15C
214
134
27E

Byte
Integer
Pointer
Byte

If zero, SystemEvent will always return False
Last vRefNum seen by standard file
Variables for .SONY driver
Sound is active?

SoundBase
SoundDCE

266
27A

Pointer
Pointer

Free-form synthesizer buffer
Sound driver device control entry

SoundLast
SoundLevel
SoundPtr
SoundVars

282
27F
262
262

SoundVBL
SPAlarm
SPATalkA
SPATalkB
SPClikCaret

26A
200

Byte
Pointer
32 Bytes

SPConfig
SPFont

ScreenVars

SPKbd

SpMisc1
SPMisc2
SPPortA
SPPortB
SPPrint
Spurious

SPValid

SPVoICtl

StkLowPt

292

Integer

8 Bytes

Is scrap on disk?

Screen driver variables (MacsBug)

End of sound driver variables
Amplitude in sound buffer
Four-tone record
Sound driver variables

16 Bytes
Longint

Vertical retrace control element for sound
Alarm time setting

1F9
1FA

Byte

Byte

AppleTalk node ID hint for port A (modem port)
AppleTalk node number hint for port B (printer port)

1FB
204

Byte
Integer

206

Byte

Serial port type-use bits
Application font number minus 1

209

20A
20B
1FC
1FE
207
60

1F8

208
110

Byte

Byte
Byte
Integer
Integer
Byte

Pointer

Byte

Byte
Pointer

Double-click and caret-blink times (in 4-tick units)

Auto-key threshold and rate (in 4-tick units)

Miscellaneous parameter RAM
Mouse scaling, startup disk, menu blink
Port A (modem) configuration
Port B (printer) configuration
Printer connection

Spurious interrupt vector

Parameter RAM validation field ($A7 if valid)

Speaker volume setting

Lowest stack as measured by stack sniffer

Switcher
SwitcherTPtr
SysEvtBuf
SysEvtMask

282
286
146
144

8 Bytes
Pointer
Pointer
Integer

SysFontFam

BA6

Used by Switcher
+ Switcher’s switch table
System event queue element buffer
System event mask

Integer

+ System font family ID or zero

+ valid only if ROM85=$7FFF (i.e., Macintosh Plus or newer)

Debugging Quick Reference Guide

Name

SysFontSize
SysMap
SysMapHndl
SysParam
SysResName

Address

BA8
A58
Ab4
1F8
AD8

Type

Comment

Integer
Integer
Handle
20 Bytes
String[15}

+ System font size (or zero for 12 point)
Reference number of system resource file

System resource file map
Low-memory copy of parameter RAM
Name of system resource file

SysVersion

15A

Integer

Version number of RAM-based system

SysZone

2A6

Pointer

Start of system heap zone

T1Arbitrate
TagData
TaskLock
TEDoText
TempRect
TERecal
TEScrpHandle

B3F
2FA
A62
A70
OFA
A74
AB4

Byte
14 Bytes
Byte
Pointer
8 Bytes
Pointer
Handle

+ $FF if VIA timer T1 is available
Sector tag info for disk drivers
Re-entering SystemTask
TextEdit do Text hook
Scratch rectangle used by system
TextEdit routine to recalculate line starts
TextEdit scrap

TEScrpLength

ABO

Integer

Size of TextEdit scrap

TESysJust

BAC

Integer

+ System justification for international

TEWdBreak

AF6

Pointer

Default TextEdit word break routine

TheCrsr

844

68 Bytes

Cursor data, mask and hotspot

TheMenu

A26

Integer

TheZone
Ticks
Time

118
16A
20C

Pointer
Longint
Longint

ID of currently highlighted menu
Current heap zone
Number of ticks since boot
Seconds since midnight, January 1, 1904

TimeVars
TmpResLoad
Tocks
ToExtFS

B30
BOF
173
3F2

Pointer
Byte
Byte
Pointer

+ Time Manager variables
+ Temporary ResLoad value
Lisa subtick count
Hook for external file systems

ToolScratch

9CE

8 Bytes

Scratch area used by Toolbox

TopMapHndl
TopMenultem

A50
B26

Handle
Integer

Most recently opened resource file’s map
+ Used for menu scrolling

Trace

Pointer

Trace vector

TrapAgain
TRAPtble
TrapVErr

BOO
80
1C

4 bytes
16 pointers
Pointer

+ Used by disk switch hook to repeat File System call
TRAP #0-15 instruction vectors
cpTRAPcc, TRAPcc, TRAPV instruction error

Unassig2
Unassig3
Unassigned

40
Co
30

32 bytes
64 bytes
4 bytes

Unassigned, reserved by Motorola
Unassigned, reserved by Motorola
Unassigned, reserved by Motorola

Uninited
UnitNtryCnt

3C
1D2
BF5
11C

Pointer
Integer

Uninitialized interrupt vector
Number of entries in unit table

Byte
Pointer
10 Bytes
10 bytes

UserFWidths
UTableBase
VBLQueue
VCBQHdr

24

VIA

160
356
1D4

WidthListHand
WidthPtr
WidthTabHandle
WindowList
WMorPort
WordRedraw
WWExist

8E4
B10
B2A
9D6
9DE
BAS
8F2

Handle
Longint
Handle
Pointer
Pointer
Byte
Byte

+ Flag saying if we used fractional widths
Start of unit table
VBL queue header
VCB queue header
VIA base address
+ List of extra width tables, or nil
+ Used by Font Manager
+ Font width table for measure
Pointer to first window in window list
Window manager's GrafPort
+ Used by TextEdit RecalDraw
If zero, Window Manager is initialized

14

Pointer

Zero divide vector

ZeroDiv

Pointer

+valid only if ROM85
= $7FFF (i.e., Macintosh Plus or newer)

385

386

Appendix D

System Globals: Numeric Listing

Address

Name

Type

Comment

0
8

ResetSPPC
BusError

8 bytes
Pointer

Reset vector
Bus error vector

C

AddrErr

Pointer

Address error vector

10
14

lilegal
ZeroDiv

Pointer
Pointer

Zero divide vector

18
1C
20
24
28
2C
30
34
38
38
3C
40
60
64
68

ChkError
TrapVErr
Privileg
Trace
Line1010
Line1111
Unassigned
Coproces
FormatEr
FmtErrVect
Uninited
Unassig2
Spurious
Autolnt1
Autolnt2

Pointer
Pointer
Pointer

Vector CHK, CHK2 instruction error
cpTRAPcc, TRAPcc, TRAPV instruction error
Privilege violation vector

Pointer
Pointer

Trace vector
1010 emulator trap (vector for A-traps)

Pointer
4 bytes
Pointer

1111 emulator trap (reserved)
Unassigned, reserved by Motorola
Vector for coprocessor protocol violation

Pointer
Pointer

Format error vector
+ Format error vector for 68010 and 68020

Illegal instruction vector

Pointer

Uninitialized interrupt vector

32 bytes

Unassigned, reserved by Motorola

Pointer
Pointer
Pointer

Spurious interrupt vector
Level 1 interrupt auto-vector
Level 2 interrupt auto-vector

6C

Autolnt3

Pointer

Level 3 interrupt auto-vector

70
74

Autolnt4
Autolnt5

Pointer

Level 4 interrupt auto-vector

Pointer

78

Autolnt6

Pointer

7C

Autolnt7

Level 5 interrupt auto-vector
Level 6 interrupt auto-vector

80
Co
100
102

Pointer

TRAPtble
Unassig3
MonkeyLives
ScrVRes

16 pointers
64 bytes
Integer

TRAP #0-15 instruction vectors
Unassigned, reserved by Motorola
Monkey tester in use if >= 0

104

ScrHRes

106

ScreenRow

Integer
Integer
Integer
Pointer

Screen vertical dots per inch
Screen horizontal dots per inch
rowBytes of screen
Top of RAM

108

MemTop

10C
110

BufPtr
StkLowPt

Pointer
Pointer

114

HeapEnd

Pointer

118
11C

TheZone
UTableBase

Pointer
Pointer

124

DskRtnAdr

Pointer

128

PoliRtnAddr

12C
12D
12E

Pointer

DskVerify
LoadTrap
MmInOK

Byte
Byte
Byte

12F
130
134
138
13A
13E

CPUFlag
AppiLimit
SonyVars
PWMValue
PollStack
PollProc

Byte
Pointer
Pointer
Integer
Pointer
Pointer

Level 7 interrupt auto-vector

Top of application memory (end of jump table)
Lowest stack as measured by stack sniffer
End of application heap
Current heap zone
Start of unit table
Used by disk driver
“Other” driver locals

Used by .SONY driver for read/verify
If nonzero, enters debugger before entering new segment
Initial memory mgr checks ok?
+ $00 = 68000, $01 = 68010, $02 = 68020
End of application heap if fully grown

Variables for .SONY driver
Current PWM value

SCC poll data start stack location
SCC poll data procedure

+ valid only if ROM85
= $7FFF (i.e., Macintosh Plus or newer)

Debugging Quick Reference Guide

Address

Name

Type

Comment

142

DskErr

144
146

Integer

SysEvtMask
SysEvtBuf

Integer
Pointer

System event mask
System event queue element buffer

10 Bytes

Event queue header

Disk routine result code

14A

EventQueue

154

EvtBufCnt

Integer

156

RndSeed

15A
15C
15D

SysVersion
SEvtEnb
DSWndUpdate

Longint

15E
15F
160

FontFlag

Byte

Font manager loop flag

IntFlag
VBLQueue

Byte
10 Bytes

Reduce interrupt disable time when bit 7 = 0
VBL queue header

16A
16E

Ticks
MBTicks

Longint
Longint

172

MBState

Byte

173
174
17C

Tocks
KeyMap
KeypadMap

Byte

Number of ticks since boot
Tickcount at last mouse button
Current mouse button state
Lisa sub-tick count

2 Longints

Bitmap showing keys up/down

184

KeyLast

186
18A

1DC
1E0
1E4
1E4

KeyTime
KeyRepTime
KayThresh
KeyRepThresh
Lvl1DT
Lvl2DT
UnitNtryCnt
VIA
SCCRd
SCCWr
IWM
GetParam
scratch20

1F8
1F8

Integer
Byte
Byte

Maximum number of events in SysEvtBurf— 1
Random number seed

Version number of RAM-based system
If zero, SystemEvent will always return False
Used by disk switch hook

Longint
Integer
Longint
Longint
Integer
Integer
32 Bytes
32 Bytes
Integer
Pointer
Pointer
Pointer
Pointer
20 Bytes
20 Bytes

Tickcount when last keystroke was received
Tickcount when key was last repeated
Threshold for key repeat
Key repeat speed
Interrupt level 1 dispatch table
Interrupt level 2 dispatch table
Number of entries in unit table
VIA base address
SCC base read address
SCC base write address
IWM base address
System parameter scratch space
Application scratch area

SPValid

Byte

Parameter RAM validation field ($A7 if. valid)

SysParam

20 Bytes

Low-memory copy of parameter RAM

1F9

SPATalkA

Byte

AppleTalk node ID hint for port A (modem port)

1FA
1FB
1FC
1FE
200
204
206
207

SPATalkB
SPConfig
SPPortA
SPPortB

Byte
Byte
Integer
Integer

AppleTalk node number hint for port B (printer port)
Serial port type-use bits
Port A (modem) configuration
Port B (printer) configuration
Alarm time setting
Application font number minus 1
Auto-key threshold and rate (in 4-tick units)
Printer connection

18E
190
192
1B2
1D2
1D4
1D8

Bitmap for numeric pad—18 bits
ASCII for last valid keycode

SPAlarm

Longint

SPFont

Integer

SPKbd

Byte

208
209
20A
20B

SPPrint
SPVoICtl
SPClikCaret
SPMisc1
SPMisc2

Byte
Byte
Byte
Byte
Byte

20C

Time

Longint

Seconds since midnight, January 1, 1904

210
212
214

BootDrive
JShell
SFSaveDisk

Integer
Integer
Integer

Drive number of boot drive
Journaling shell state
Last vRefNum seen by standard file

Speaker volume setting
Double-click and caret-blink times (in 4-tick units)
Miscellaneous parameter RAM
Mouse scaling, startup disk, menu blink

387

388

Address

Appendix D

Name

Type

Comment

216

KbdVars

21A

JKybdTask

Keyboard driver variables
Keyboard VBL task hook
Keyboard model number
Bit 7 = Apple logo on/off, Bit 6 = beeped, Bit 0 = enabled
Last memory manager error

21E

KbdType

21F
220

AlarmState
MemeErr

Longint
Pointer
Byte
Byte
Integer

222

DiskVars

62 Bytes

Variables used by .SONY driver

222

JFigTrkSpd

Pointer

Disk driver vector

226

JDiskPrime

Pointer

22A

JRdAddr

Pointer

Disk driver vector
Disk driver vector

22E
232

JRdData
JWrData

Pointer
Pointer

Disk driver vector
Disk driver vector

236

JSeek

Pointer

Disk driver vector

23A

JSetUpPoll

Pointer

Disk driver vector

23E

JRecal

Pointer

Disk driver vector

242

JControl

Pointer

Disk driver vector

246
24A

JWakeUp
JReSeek

Pointer
Pointer

Disk driver vector

24E

JMakeSpdTbl

Pointer

Disk driver vector

252
256

JAdrDisk
JSetSpeed

Pointer
Pointer

Disk driver vector
Disk driver vector

25A
25E

NiblITbl
FIEvtMask

Used by disk driver
+ Mask of allowable events to flush at FlushEvents

260
261

SdVolume

Finder

Pointer
Integer
Byte
Byte

262
262

SoundPtr
SoundVars

Pointer
32 Bytes

266
26A

SoundBase
SoundVBL

Pointer

Free-form synthesizer buffer

16 Bytes

27A
27E

SoundDCE
SoundActive

Pointer
Byte

Vertical retrace control element for sound

27F
280
282
282
286

SoundLevel
CurPitch
SoundLast
Switcher
SwkcherTPtr

Byte
Integer

28E
290

ROM85
PortAUse

291
292
29A

PortBUse
ScreenVars
JGNEFilter
Key1Trans

29E
2A2

Disk driver vector

Global volume control

Private Finder flags

Four-tone record
Sound driver variables

Sound driver device control entry
Sound is active?

8 Bytes
Pointer

Amplitude in sound buffer
Current pitch value
End of sound driver variables
Used by Switcher
+ Switcher’s switch table

Integer
Byte
Byte
8 Bytes
Pointer
Pointer

+ $FFFF =64K ROM, $7FFF
= 128K ROM or newer
Bits 0-3: port type; bit 7: 0O=in use
Port B use, same format as PortAUse
Screen driver variables (MacsBug)
GetNextEvent filter proc
Keyboard mapping procedure

Key2Trans

Pointer

2A6

SysZone

Pointer

2AA

ApplZone

Numeric keypad mapping procedure
Start of system heap zone

Pointer

2AE

ROMBase

Start of application heap zone

Pointer

2B2

Start of ROM

RAMBase

Pointer

2B6

BasicGlob

Lowest address for trap routines in RAM

2BA
2BE
2CE
2CF

Pointer

DSAlertTab
ExtStsDT
SCCASts
SCCBSts

Basic globals

Pointer
16 Bytes
Byte
Byte

System error alerts
SCC ext/sts secondary dispatch table
SCC read reg 0 last ext/sts rupt—A
SCC read reg 0 last ext/sts rupt—B

+ valid only if

ROM85 =$7FFF

(i.e., Macintosh Plus or newer)

Debugging Quick Reference Guide

Address

Name

Type

Comment

2D0

SerialVars

2D8

ABusVars

8 bytes

16 Bytes

Async driver variables

2E0
2F0

FinderName
DoubleTime
CaretTime

String[15]
Longint
Longint

Filename of the Finder
Allowed ticks between clicks of a double-click
Ticks between caret blinks

ScrDmpEnb
ScrDmpType
TagData

Byte
Byte
14 Bytes
Longint
Integer
Integer

Screen dump enabled if nonzero
$FF dumps screen, $FE dumps front window
Sector tag info for disk drivers
Buffer tag file number
Buffer tag flags
Logical block number

Time stamp
Header of system’s drive queue

2F4
2F8

2F9
2FA
2FC
300
302

BufTgFNum
BufTgFFlg
BufTgFBkNum

304
308

DrvOHdr

Integer
10 Bytes

312

PWMBuf2

Pointer

Longint

Constant $00FFFFFF

31A
SIE
322
326
328
32C

MaskBC
MinStack
DefitStack
MMDefFlags
GZRootHnd
GZRootPtr

Longint
Longint
Longint
Integer
Handle
Pointer

Memory Manager byte oount mask (also called Lo3Bytes)
Minimum size of stack
Default size of stack
Default zone flags
Block that must not be moved by GrowZone function
Root pointer for GrowZons

330

GZMoveHnd

Handle

Moving handle for GrowZone

334

DSDrawProc

Pointer

Alternate SysError draw procedure

338
33C

EjectNotify
IAZNotify

Pointer
Pointer

Routine called when a disk is ejected
Routine called when application heap is reinitialized

340

CkdDB

Integer

Used for searching the directory

340
346
347
348
349
34A
34C
34E
352
356

FileVars
FlushOnly
RegRsrc
FLckUnIck
FreSync
NewMount
DrMstrBlk
FCBSPtr
DefVCBPtr
VCBQOHdr

184 Bytes
Byte
Byte
Byte
Byte
Integer
Integer
Pointer
Pointer
10 bytes

File system variables
Flag used by UnMountVol,FlushVol
Flag used by File Manager
Flag used by SetFilLock,RstFilLock

360
360

FSBusy
FSQHdr

Integer
10 Bytes

When set, all File System calls are synched
Used by MountVol to flag new mounts
Master directory block in a volume (MFS)
File control blocks
Default volume control block
VCB queue header
Nonzero when the file system is busy
File system queue header

362

FSQHead

Pointer

First queued command in File System queue

366
36A

FSQTail
RgSvArea

Pointer
38

Last File System queue element
Register save area used by system

3A2

ErCode

Integer

Disk driver async errors

3A4

Params

50 bytes

Used by Device Manager for I/O parameter blocks

3D6

FSTemp8s

8 bytes

Used by File System

3DE
3E2

FSTemp4
FSQueueHook

Longint
Pointer

Used by File System
Hook to capture all FS calls

31A

BufTgDate

Local variables used by AppleTalk

Lo3Bytes

PWM buffer 1 (or 2 if sound)

3E6

ExtFSHook

Pointer

Used by external file system

3EA
3EE

DskSwtchHook
ReqstVol

Pointer
Pointer

Hook for disk-switch dialog
VCB of off-line or external volume

3F2
3F6

ToExtFS
fsVarEnd

Pointer

Hook for external file systems
End of file system variables

389

390

Address

Appendix D

Name

Type

Comment

3F8

DSAlertRect

Rect

Rectangle for disk-switch alert

400

DispatchTab

1024 Bytes

A-Trap dispatch table (64K ROM)

4B8
800
800
804

JBlockMove
GrafBegin
JHideCursor
JShowCursor

Pointer

+ Vector used by Memory Manager
QuickDraw system globals area
Vector used by QuickDraw
Vector used by QuickDraw
Vector used by QuickDraw
Vector used by QuickDraw
Vector used by QuickDraw
Vector used by QuickDraw
Vector used by QuickDraw
Vector used by QuickDraw
Vector used by QuickDraw
Vector used by QuickDraw
Base address of screen
Low-level interrupt mouse location
Unjerked mouse coordinates
Cursor pinning rectangle
Cursor hit rectangle
Cursor data, mask and hotspot

808

JShieldCursor

80C
810

JScernAddr
JScrnSize

Pointer

Pointer
Pointer
Pointer
Pointer

814

JinitCrsr

Pointer

818
81C
820

JSetCrsr
JCrsrObscure
JUpdateProc

Pointer
Pointer
Pointer

824
824
828
82C
834
83C
844
888
88C
8CC
8CD
8CE
8CF
8D0
8D2
8D3
8D6
8DA
8DE
SEO
8E4
8E4
8E8
8EC
SEE
8F2
8F2

LGrafJump
ScrnBase
MTemp
RawMouse
CrsrPin
CrsrRect
TheCrsr
CrsrAddr
CrsrSave
CrsrVis
CrsrBusy
CrsrNew
CrsrCouple
CrsrState
CrsrObscure
CrsrScale
MouseMask
MouseOff set
JournalFlag
JSwapFont
JFontinfo
WidthListHand
JournalRef
CrsrThresh
JCrsrTask
GrafEnd
WWExist

Pointer

8F3

QDExist

SF4

JFetch

Pointer

8F8
8FC
900
900
902
904
908
910
930

JStash
JlIODone
CurApRefNum
LoadVars
LaunchFlag
CurrentA5
CurStackBase
CurApName
SaveSegHandle

Pointer
Pointer
Integer
68 Bytes
Byte
Pointer
Pointer
String[31]
Handle

+ valid only if

ROM85 =$7FFF

Pointer
Longint
Point
Rect
Rec
68 Bytes
Pointer
64 Bytes
Byte
Byte

Screen-memory address covered by cursor
Saved data under the cursor

Byte
Byte
Integer
Byte
Byte
Point
Point
Integer
Longint

Cursor changed?
Cursor coupled to mouse?
Cursor nesting level
Cursor obscure flag
Cursor scaled?
Mask for ANDing with mouse
Offset for adding after ANDing
Journaling state
Jump entry for FMSwapFont

Pointer

Jump entry for FMFontMetrics

Handle
Integer
Integer
Pointer

+ List of extra width tables, or nil
Journaling driver's refnum
Delta threshold for mouse scaling
Address of CrsrVBLTask
End of QuickDraw system globals
If zero, Window Manager is initialized
QuickDraw is initialized if zero

Byte
Byte

Cursor visible?
Cursor locked out?

Fetch a byte routine for drivers

Stash a byte routine for drivers
lODone vector
RefNum of application’s resource file
Segment Loader variables
Used by Launch and Chain
Correct value of A5
Current stack base
Name of current application
CODE resource 0 (used by Launch)

(i.e., Macintosh Plus or newer)

Debugging Quick Reference Guide

Address

Name

Type

Comment

934
936

CurJTOffset
CurPageOption

93A

LoaderPBlock

Integer
Integer

Offset from A5 to start of jump table
Current page 2 video/sound configuration

10 Bytes

parameter block for ExitToShell

944
944
944
946

LastLGlobal
PrintErr
PrintVars
ChooserBits

integer
16 Bytes
Byte

Last Segment Loader global
Current print error
Print code variables
Bit 7=0, don't run; Bit 6=0, gray out AppleTalk

954

CoreEditVars

12 Bytes

Core edit variables

954
960

LastPGlobal
ScrapInfo

960
960

ScrapSize
ScrapVars

Longint
Longint
32 Bytes

Last Printing Manager global
Old name for ScrapSize
Length of desk scrap
Scrap manager variables

964
968
96A

ScrapHandle
ScrapCount
ScrapState

96C
970
980
980

Pointer
String[15]
Handle

984
986
987
988
988
98A
98C
98D
98E
990

ScrapName
ScrapTag
RomFontQ
ScrapEnd

ApFontiD
GotStrike
FMDefaultSize
CurFMFamily
CurFMinput
CurFMSize
CurFMFace
CurFMNeeaBits
CurFMDevice
CurFMNumer

Integer
Byte
Byte
Integer
Pointer
Integer
Byte
Boolean
Integer
Point

994
998

CurFMDenom
FMgrOutRec

Point
Pointer

Current denominator of scale factor
QuickDraw font output record

998

FOutRec

Pointer

Font Manager output record

Handle
Byte
Byte
Byte
Byte
Byte
Byte
Byte
Byte
Byte
Byte

Font bits
Bolding factor
Italic factor
Underline offset
Underline “halo”
Underline thickness
Shadow factor
Extra horizontal width
Height above baseline
Height below baseline
Maximum width of character

998

FOutError

Handle
Integer
Integer

Integer

Desk scrap
Count changed by ZeroScrap
Is scrap on disk?
Scrap file name
Scrap file name
System font
End of scrap variables

Resource ID of application font
Do we have the strike? (Font Manager)
Default size of Font Record
Current font family
Quickdraw FMinput Record
Current font size
Current font face
Does Font Manager need bits?
Current font device
Current numerator of scale factor

Error code

99A
99E
99F
9A0
9A1
9A2
9A3
9A4
9A5
9A6
9A7

FOutFontHandle
FOutBold
FOutitalic
FOutULOffset
. FOutULShadow
FOutULThick
FOutShadow
FOutExtra
FOutAscent
FOutDescent
FOutWidMax

9A8

FOutLeading

Byte

Space between lines

9AE

CurFMDenom

Point

Point for denominators of scale factor

9B2
9B6
9CE
9D6

FMDotsPerinch
FMStyleTab
ToolScratch
WindowList

Point
18 bytes
8 Bytes
Pointer

Dots per inch of current device
Style heuristic table supplied by device
Scratch area used by Toolbox
Pointer to first window in window list

9AA

FOutNumer

Point

Numerators of scaling factors

391

392

Address

Appendix D

Name

Type

Comment

9DA
9DC
9DE
9E6
9EA
9EE
9F2

SaveUpdate
PaintWhite
WMgrPort
OldStructure
OldContent
GrayRgn
SaveVisRgn

9F6
9FA

DragHook
scratch8

Integer
Integer
Pointer
Handle
Handle
Handle
Handle
Pointer

Enable window update accumulation?
Erase newly drawn windows?
Window manager's GrafPort
Saved structure region
Saved content region
Rounded gray desk region
Temporarily saved visRegion
Routine called during dragging

8 Bytes

Application scratch area

OFA
A02

TempRect
OneOne

8 Bytes
Longint

Scratch rectangle used by system
Constant $00010001

AOE
A1C
A20
A22
A24

lconBitmap
MenuList
MBarEnable
CurDeKind
MenuFlash

BitMap

Used by Ploticon

Handle
Integer
Integer
Integer

A26

TheMenu

Current menuBar list structure
menuBar enable for desk accessories
WindowkKind of deactivated window
Flash feedback count

Integer

A28
A2C
A2C
A30
A34
A3C
A44
A46
A4A
A50
A54

SavedHandle
MBarHook
MrMacHook
MenuHook
DragPattern
DeskPattern
DragFlag
CurDragAction
FPState
TopMapHndl
SysMapHndl

Handle
Pointer
Pointer
Pointer
Pattern
Pattern
Integer
Pointer
6 Bytes
Handle
Handle

CurMap
ResLoad
ResErr
TaskLock
FScaleDisable
CurActivate
CurDeactive
DeskHook
TEDoText
TERecal
ApplScratch
MicroSoft
GhostWindow
CloseOrnHook
RestProc
ResumeProc
SaveProc
SaveSP
ANumber
ACount
DABeeper
DAStrings
TEScrpLength

Integer
Integer
Integer
Byte
Byte
Pointer
Pointer
Pointer
Pointer
Pointer
12 Bytes
12 bytes
Pointer
Pointer
Pointer
Pointer
Pointer
Longint
Integer
Integer
Pointer
4 Handles
Integer

AO06

Ab58

A5A
A5E
A60
A62
A63
A64
A68
A6C
A70
A74
A78
A78
A84
A88
A8C
A8C
A90
A94
A98
AYA
A9C
AAO
ABO

MinusOne

SysMap

Longint

Integer

Constant $FFFFFFFF

ID of currently highlighted menu

Saved bits under a menu
User hook before MenuHook
Old name for MBarHook
User hook during menuSelect
Dragged by DragTheRgn
Desktop pattern
Implicit parameter to DragControl
Implicit actionProc for DragControl
Floating point state
Most recently opened resource file’s map
System resource file map

Reference number of system resource file

Reference number of current resource file
Load resources on GetResource if nonzero
Resource Manager error code
Re-entering SystemTask
Disable font scaling?
Window that will get/activate event
Window that will get/activate event
Routine that will be called to paint the desk
TextEdit doText hook
TextEdit routine to recalculate line starts
Reserved for use by application
Old name for ApplScratch
Window hidden from FrontWindow
Routine called when desk accessories are closed
Old name for ResumeProc
Resume procedure for system errors
Address of Save failsafe procedure
Safe SP for restart or save
Active alert ID
Number of times this alert called
Beep routine for ModalDialog
ParamText substitution strings
Size of TextEdit scrap

Debugging Quick Reference Guide

Address

Name

Type

Comment

AB4
AB8
AD8
AEC

TEScrpHandle
AppPacks
SysResName
AppParmHandle

AFO

DSErrCode
ResErrProc
TEWdBreak
DigFont
HeapStart

Handle
8 Handles
String[15]
Handle
Integer
Pointer

TextEdit scrap
Handles to PackO through Pack7
Name of system resource file
Handle to Finder information on Launch

AF2
AF6
AFA

BOO
BOO
BO4
BO6
BOA
BOE
B10
B14

TrapAgain
KeyMVars
ROMMapHndl
PWMBuf1

Pointer
Integer

4 bytes
Integer
Handle
Pointer

393

Last system error alert ID

Routine called whenever Resource Manager error occurs
Default TextEdit word break routine
Default dialog font ID
Start of the system heap (64K ROM)

+ Used by disk switch hook to repeat File System call
+ROM KEYM procedure variables
+ ROM resource file’s map
+ PWM buffer pointer

BootMask

Integer

+ Used by boot code

WidthPtr

Longint

+ Used by Font Manager

B22
B26
B28
B2A
B2E
B30

AtalkHk1
AtalkHk2
SCSIFlag
TopMenultem

Pointer
Pointer
Integer
Integer

+ AppleTalk hook
+ AppleTalk hook
+ Configuration flag for SCSI
+ Used for menu scrolling

AtMenuBottom
WidthTabHandle
SCS|IDrvrs
TimeVars

Integer
Handle
Integer
Pointer

+ Flag used by scrolling menus
+ Font width table for measure
+ Bitmap for loaded SCSI drivers
+ Time Manager variables

834
B36

BtDskRfn
BootTmp8

Integer
8 Bytes

+ Refnum of boot disk driver
+ Temp space needed by StartBoot

B3F
B40

T1 Arbitrate
JDiskSel

Byte
Pointer

+ $FF if VIA timer T1 is available
+ Disk driver vector

B44

JSendCmd

Pointer

+ Disk driver vector

B48
B4c
B9E

JDCDReset
LastSPExtra
RomMapinsert

Pointer
Longint
Byte

+ Disk driver vector
+ Most recent value of space extra
+$FF = look first in ROM resource file, $00 = don’t look in ROM
+ Temporary ResLoad value

B18

BOF

TmpResLoad

Byte

BAO

IntlSpec

Pointer

+ Extra international data

BA4

RMGRPerm

Byte

+ Permission byte for OpenResFile

BAS

WordRedraw

Byte

+ Used by TextEdit RecalDraw

BA6
BA8

SysFontFam
SysFontSize

Integer
Integer

+ System font family ID or zero
+ System font size (or zero for 12 point)

BAA
BAC
BAE
BB2
BB3
BC2
BC6

MBarHeight
TESysJust
HiHeapMark

SegHiEnable
FDevDisable
LastFOND
FONDID

Integer
Integer
Pointer
Byte
Byte
Handle
Integer

+ Height of menu bar (usually 20)
+ System justification for international
+ Highest address used by a heap zone below A7
+ 0 to disable MoveHHi in LoadSeg
+ $FF to disable device-defined style extra
+ Last font definition record (FOND)
+1D of last font definition record (FOND)

BC8

App2Packs

8 Handles

+ handles for Pack8-Pack15

BE8
BEC
BF4
BF5

MAErrProc
MASuperTab
FractEnable
UserFWidths

Pointer
Handle
Byte
Byte

+ MacApp error procedure
+ MacApp superclass table
+ Flag for fractional font widths
+ Flag saying if we used fractional widths

BF6
BFA

FScaleHFact
FScaleVFact

Longint
Longint

+ Horizontal font scale factor
+ Vertical font scale factor

+valid only if ROM85 = $7FFF (i.e., Macintosh Plus or newer)

394

Appendix D

Data Structures
Name

Type

Hex offset

Dec offset

AlertTemplate

boundsRect
itemsID
stages

Rec+
Integer
StageList

(size)

AuxCtiRec
acNext

0
8
A

0
8
10

C

12

AuxCtiHandle

0

0

acOwner
acCTable

ControlHandle
CCTabHandle

4
8

4
8

acFlags

Integer

C

12

acRefCon
(size)

Longint

12
16

18
22

awNext
awOwner
awCTable

AuxWinHandle
WindowPtr
CTabHandle

0
4
8

0
4
8

dialogCltem
awFlags

CTabHandle
Longint

C
10

12
16

awReserved

CTabHandle

14

20

awRefCon

Longint

18

24

1C

28

acReserved

Longint

E

14

AuxWinRec

(size)
BitMap

baseAddr

Pointer

0

0

rowBytes

Integer

4

4

bounds
(size)

Rect

6
D

6
14

OElemPtr
Integer

0
4

0
4

CinfoPBRec
qLink
qType

ioTrap
ioCmdAddr
ioCompletion
ioResult
ioNamePtr
ioVRefNum
ioFRefNum
filler1
ioFDirlndex

Integer
Pointer
ProcPtr
OSErr
StringPtr
Integer
Integer
Integer
Integer

ioFlAttrib

SignedByte

filler2

SignedByte

hFilelnfo:
ioFlFndrinfo

Finfo

ioFINum
iOFIStBlk
ioFiLgLen

Longint
Integer
Longint

6
8
C
10
12
16
18

6
8
12
16
18
22
24

1A
1C

26
28

1E

30

1F

31

20

32

30
34
36

48
52
54

Debugging Quick Reference Guide

Name

Type

ioFiPyLen

ioFIRStBlk

Longint
Integer

3A
3E

58
62

ioFIRLgLen
ioFIRPylLen
ioFlCrDat
ioFIMdDat

Longint
Longint
Longint
Longint

40
44
48
4C

64
68
72
76

ioFIBkDat

Longint

50

80

ioFlXFndrinfo

Finfo

54

84

ioFlParlD
ioFIClpSiz

Longint
Longint

64
68

100
104

dirlnfo:
ioDrUsrWds
ioDrDirlD
ioDrNmFls

Array[1..8] of Integer
Longint
Integer

20
30
34

32
48
52

filler3

Array[1..9] of Integer

36

54

ioDrCrDat
ioDrMdDat
ioDrBkDat

Longint
Longint
Longint

48
4c
50

72
76
80

ioDrFndrinfo

Array[1..8] of Integer

54

84

ioDrParlD

Longint

64

100

QElemPtr
Integer
Integer

0
4
6

0
4
6

Pointer
ProcPtr
OSErr
StringPtr
Integer

8
C
10
12
16

8
12
16
18
22

CMovePBRec
qLink
qlype
ioTrap

ioCmdAddr
ioCompletion
ioResult
ioNamePtr
ioVRefNum

Hex offset

Dec offset

filler’

Longint

18

24

ioNewName
filler2

StringPtr
Longint

1C
20

24

28
32

36

filler3
ioDirlD

Array[1..2] of Longint
Longint

28
30

40
48

ControlHandle
WindowPtr
Rect

0
4
8

0
4
8

Byte
Byte
Integer

10
11
12

16
17
18

Integer
Integer

14
16

20
22

contriDefProc
contriData

Handle
Handle

18

24

1C

28

contrlAction

ProcPtr

20

32

contrirfCon
contriTitle

Longint
Str255

24
28

36
40

28

40

ioNewDirlD

ControlRecord
nextControl
contrliOwner
contriRect
contrlVis
contrlHilite
contriValue
contriMin
contriMax

(size without title)

Longint

395

396

Appendix D

Name

Type

Hex offset

Dec offset

Cursor
data

Bits16

0

0

mask

Bits16

20

32

hotSpot
(size)

Point

40
68

64
104

DialogRecord

window

WindowRecord

0

0

Items

Handle

9C

156

textH
EditField
EditOpen

TEHandle
Integer
Integer

AO
A4
A6

160
164
166

ADeflitem
(size)

Integer

A8
AA

168
170

DialogTemplate

boundsRect

Rect

0

0

prociD
visible
goAwayFlag
refCon

Integer
Boolean
Boolean
Longint

8
A
Cc
E

8
10
12
14

itemsID

Integer

12

18

title

Str255

14

20

what

Integer

0

0

message
when

Longint
Longint

2
6

2
6

where
modifiers
(size)

Point
Integer

A
E
10

10
14
16

QElemPtr
Integer

0
4

0
4

Integer

6

6

(size)
EventRecord

FCBPRec

qLink
qlype
ioTrap

ioCmdAddr
ioCompletion
ioResult
ioNamePtr
ioVRefNum
ioRefNum
filler

ioFCBindex
ioFCBFINm
ioFCBFlags
ioFCBStBlik
ioFCBEOF
ioFCBPLen
ioFCBCrPs
ioFCBVRefNum
ioFCBClpSiz
ioFCBPariID

Pointer
ProcPtr
OSErr
StringPtr
Integer
Integer

8
C

8
12

10
12
16

16
18
22

Integer

1A

18

24

Longint
Longint
Integer
Integer
Longint
Longint
Longint
Integer
Longint
Longint

1C
20

28
32

24
26
28

36
38
40

2C
30
34
36

44
48
52
54

3A

58

26

Debugging Quick Reference Guide

Name
GrafPort
device

Type

Integer

Hex offset

0

Dec offset

0

portBits
portBits.baseAddr
poriBits.rowBytes
portBits.Bounds
portRect
visRgn

BitMap
Pointer
Integer
Rect
Rect
RgnHandle

2
2
4
6
10
18

2
2
4
6
16
24

clipRgn

RgnHandle

1C

28

bkPat
fillPat
pnLoc
pnSize
pnMode

Pattern
Pattern
Point
Point
Integer

20
28
30
34
38

32
40

pnPat
pnvVis
txFont

Pattern
Integer
integer

3A
42
44

58
66
68

txFace

Style

46

70

txMode
txSize

Integer
Integer

48
4A

72
74

48

52
56

spExtra

Longint

4C

76

fgColor

Longint

50

80

bkColor
colrBit

Longint
Integer

54
58

84
88

patStretch
picSave
rgnSave
polySave
grafProcs
(size)

Integer
Handle
Handle
Handle
QDProcsPtr

5A
5C
60
64
68
6C

90
92
96
100
104
108

qLink
qType
ioTrap

QElemPtr
Integer
Integer

0
4
6

0
4
6

ioCmdAddr
ioCompletion
ioResult
ioNamePtr
ioVRefNum

Pointer
ProcPtr
OSErr
StringPtr
Integer

8
C
10
12
16

8
12
16
18
22

Integer
SignedByte
SignedByte

18
1A
1B

24
26
27

ioMisc

Pointer

1C

28

ioBuffer
ioReqCount

Pointer
Longint

20
24

32
36

HParamBlockRec

ioParam:

ioRefNum
ioVersNum
ioPermssn

ioActCount

Longint

28

40

ioPosMode
ioPosOffset

integer
Longint

2C
2E

44
46

397

398

Appendix D

Name

fileParam:
ioFRefNum

Type

Hex offset

Dec offset

18
1A

24
26

1B

27

ioFVersNum

Integer SignedByte

filler1

SignedByte

Integer
SignedByte
SignedByte
Finfo

1€
1E
1F
20

28
30
31
32

ioDirlD
ioFIStBik
ioFiLgLen
ioFlPyLen
ioFIRStBik
ioFIRLgLen
ioFIRPyLen
ioFICrDat

Longint
Integer
Longint
Longint
Integer
Longint
Longint
Longint

30
34
36
3A
SE
40
44
48

48
52
54
58
62
64
68
72

volumeParam:
filler4

Longint

18

24

ioFDirindex
ioFlAttrib
ioFlVersNum
ioFlFndrinfo

ioFIMdDat

ioVollndex
ioVCrDate
ioVLsMod

Longint

Integer
Longint
Longint

4C

1C
1E
22

76

28
30
34

ioVAtrb

integer

26

38

ioVNmFls

Integer

28

40

ioVBitMap

Integer

2A

ioVAllocPtr
ioVNmAIBlksioOVAIBIkSiz
ioVClpSiz

Integer
Integer
Longint
Longint

ioAIBISt

Integer

ioVNxtCNID
ioVFrBlik
ioVSigWord
ioVDrvinfo
ioVDRefNum
ioVFSID
ioVBkUp
ioVSeqNum
ioVWrCnt

ioVFilCnt
ioVDirCnt
ioVFndrinfo
Menuinfo
menulD
menuWidth

Longint
Integer
Integer
Integer
Integer
Integer
Longint
Integer
Longint

Longint
Longint
Array[1..8] of Longint
Integer

menuHeight

Integer
Integer

menuProc
enableFlags

Handle
Longint

menuData
(size)

Str255

2C
2E
30
34
38

42

44
46

48
52
56

3A
3E
40
42
44
46
48
4C

58
62
64
66
68
70
72
76

4E

78

52
56
5A

82
86
90

0

0

2
4

2
4

6
A

6
10

E
E

14
14

Debugging Quick Reference Guide

Name

ParamBlockRec
qLink

qlype
ioTrap

ioCmdAddr
ioCompletion
ioResult
ioNamePtr
ioVRefNum

Type

QElemPtr

integer
integer

Hex offset

0
4
6

Dec offset

0
4
6

Pointer
ProcPtr
OSErr
StringPtr
Integer

8
Cc
10
12
16

8
12
16
18
22

ioRefNum
ioVersNum
ioPermssn

Integer
SignedByte
SignedByte

18
1A
1B

24
26
27

ioMisc

Pointer

1C

28

ioBuffer
ioReqCount

Pointer
Longint

20
24

32
36

ioActCount

Longint

ioParam:

Integer
Longint

2C
2E

28

40

ioFRefNum
ioFVersNum

Integer
SignedByte

18
1A

24
26

filler1
ioFDirlndex

SignedByte
Integer

1B
1C

27
28

ioFlAttrib
ioFlVersNum

SignedByte
SignedByte

1E
1F

30
31

ioPosMode
ioPosOffset

44
46

fileParam:

ioFlFndrinfo

Finfo

20

32

ioFINum

Longint

30

48

ioFIStBlk

integer

34

52

ioFiLgLen

Longint

36

54

ioFiPyLen
ioFIRStBik

Longint
Integer

3A
SE

58
62

ioFIRLgLen
ioFIRPyLen
ioFiCrDat
ioFiIMdDat

Longint
Longint

64
68

Longint

40
44
48
4C

volumeParam:
filler2
ioVollndex

Longint
Integer

18
1C

24
28

ioVCrDate
ioVLsBkUp
ioVAtrb
ioVNmFlis

Longint
Longint
Integer
Integer

1E
22
26
28

30
34
38
40

ioVDirSt

Integer

2A

42

ioVBILn

Integer

2C

44

ioVNmAIBIks
ioVAIBIkSiz

integer
Longint

2E
30

46
48

ioVClpSiz
ioAIBISt

Longint
Integer

34
38

52
56

ioVNxtFNum

Longint

3A

58

ioVFrBik

integer

3E

62

Longint

72

76

399

400

Appendix D

Name

Type

Hex offset

Dec offset

18
1A
1C

24
26
28

cntriParam:

ioCRefNum
csCode
csParam

Integer
Integer
Array[0..10] of Integer

Point

Vv

Integer

0

0

h

Integer

2

4

2
4

(size)
Rect
top

Integer

0

0

left
bottom

Integer
Integer

2
4

2
4

right

Integer

6

6

topLeft
botRight

Point
Point

0
4

0
4

8

8
0

(size)

SFReply
good

Boolean

0

copy

Boolean

1

1

fType
vRefNum
version
fName
(size)

OSType
Integer
Integer
String[63]

2
6
8
A

2
6
8
10

destRect
viewRect

Rect
Rect

0
8

0
8

selRect

Rect

10

16

lineHeight
fontAscent
selPoint
selStart

Integer
Integer
Point
Integer

18
1A
1C
20

24
26
28
32

selEnd
active
wordBreak

Integer
Integer

22
24

34
36

ProcPtr

26

38

clikLoop

Procptr

2A

42

clickTime

Longint

2E

46

clickLoc

Integer

32

50

caretTime

Longint

34

52

caretState
just
TELength
hText

Integer
Integer
Integer
Handle

38
3A
3C
3E

56
58
60
62

recalBack
recalLines

Integer
Integer

42
44

66
68

clikStuff
crOnly

Integer
Integer

46
48

70
72

TERec

txFont

Integer

4A

74

txFace

Style

4C

76

txMode

Integer

4E

78

txSize

Integer

50

80

Debugging Quick Reference Guide

Name

Type

inPort
highHook

GrafPtr
ProcPtr

52
56

82
86

caretHook
nLines

ProcPtr
Integer

5A
5E

80
94

lineStarts

Array of Integer

60

96

68

104

0
4

0
4

(size of new TERecord)

qLink
qlype

QElemPtr
Integer

vcbAtrb

vcbFlags
vcbSigWord
vcbCrDate
vcbLsMod

Integer
Integer
Longint
Longint

Hex offset

Dec offset

6
8
A

6
8
10

Integer

E
12

14
18

vcbNmFls

Integer

14

20

vcbVBMSt
vcbAllocPtr

Integer
Integer

16
18

22
24

26

vcbNmAIBIks

Integer

1A

vcbAIBIkSiz

Longint

1C

28

vebClpSiz
vcbAlIBISt
vcbNxtCNID

Longint
Integer
Longint

20
24
26

32
36
38

vcbFreeBks
vcbVN
vebDrvNum
vcbDRefNum
vcbFSID
vcbVRefNum

Integer
String[27]
Integer
Integer
Integer
Integer

2A
2C
4B
4A
4C
4E

42
44
75
74
76
78

vcbMAdr

Pointer

50

80

vcbBufAdr
vcbMLen
vcbDirlndex

Pointer
Integer
Integer

54
58
5A

84
88
90

vcbDirBlk
vcbVoIBkUp

Integer
Longint

5C
5E

92
94

vcbVSeqNum

Integer

62

98

vcbWrCnt
vcbXTClpSiz
vcbCTClpSiz
vcbNmRtDirs
vebFilCnt
vebDirCnt
vcbFndrinfo
vcbVCSize
vcbVBMCSiz
vebCtiCSiz
vcbXTAIBIks
vcbCTAIBIks

Longint
Longint
Longint
Integer
Longint
Longint
Array[1..8] of Longint
Integer
Integer
Integer
Integer
Integer

64
68
6C
70
72
76
78
98
9A
9C
9E
AO

100
104
108
112
114
118
120
152
154
156
158
160

vcbXTRef

Integer

A2

162

vcbCTRef

Integer

A4

164

vebCt1Buf
vcbDirlDM
vcbOffsM

Longint
Longint
Integer

A6
AA
AE

166
170
174

(size)

402

Appendix D

Name

Type

Hex offset

Dec offset

WDPBRec

qLink

QElemPtr

0

0

qType
ioTrap

integer
Integer

4
6

4
6

ioCmdAddr
ioCompletion
ioResult
ioNamePtr
ioVRefNum

Pointer
ProcPtr
OSErr
StringPtr
Integer

8
C
10
12
16

8
12
16
18
22

filler1

Integer

18

24

ioWDindex
ioWDProcliD
ioWDVRefNum
filler2
ioWDDirlD

Integer
Longint
Integer
Array[1..7] of Integer
Longint

1A
1C
20
22
30

26
28
32
34
48

port
windowkKind

GrafPort
Integer

0
6C

0
108

visible

Boolean

6E

110

hilited
goAwayFlag

Boolean
Boolean

6F
70

111
112

strucRgn
contRgn
updateRgn

RgnHandle
RgnHandle
RgnHandle

72
76
7A

114
118
122

windowDefProc

Handle

7E

126

dataHandle

Handle

82

130

8A
8C

138
140

WindowRecord

titleHandle
titleWidth
ControlList

StringHandle
Integer
ControlHandle

nextWindow

WindowPeek

windowPic
refCon
(size)

PicHandle
Longint

86

134

90

144

94

148

98

9C

152
156

0
4

0
4

8
C
10

8
12
16

Zone

BkLim
PurgePtr
HFstFree
ZCBFree
GZProc

MoreMast
Flags

CntRel
MaxRel
CntNRel

MaxNRel
CntEmpty
CntHandles
MinCBFree
PurgeProc
SparePtr
AllocPtr

HeapData
(size of header)

Pointer
Pointer
Pointer
Longint
ProcPtr

integer
integer

Integer
Integer
Integer

Integer
Integer
Integer
Longint
ProcPtr
Pointer
Pointer

Integer

14

20

16

22

18
1A
1C

1E
20

24
26
28

30
32

22

34

24
28

36
40

2C
30

44
48

34

52

34

52

GLOs
Address register direct

5S

AR

Y

A 68000 addressing mode in which the operand is the con-

tents of an address register.

Addressing mode

Any of several methods used by a microprocessor to determine an

operand.
And_

See logical and.

Application heap

The area of memory that contains the application’s code and its

resources. You can find out where it starts by examining the global variable ApplZone.

A-trap A call to the Macintosh User Interface Toolbox or Operating System. Same as
system call, ROM call, and trap.
Automatic (variable) A variable that’s created in a C function and destroyed when
the function ends; similar to a local variable in a Pascal routine.
Autoscrolling The technique used by many text-editing applications of automatically
scrolling the window’s contents when the user is selecting something and drags the
mouse below the window.
Binary-coded decimal A numbering scheme used by the 68000 that uses one hexadecimal digit to represent one decimal digit.
Blank segment

Block header

See main segment.

The first 8 bytes of a heap block, which gives information about the

block. Also called heap block header.

Break point A location within a program set by the person debugging at which the
debugger will interrupt and take control.
Caselabel

The name ofa

part ofa Pascal case statement that can be branched to by the

case statement.

Case selector

The value used to determine which part of a case statement to execute.

Check exception <A 68000 exception caused by a failed CHK instruction. It usually
indicates a Pascal value range error.
Checksum A

partial sum of a range of values, used to determine if any values in the

range have changed.

403

404

Glossary

Completion routine

A section of code that is executed when an asynchronous I/O

operation is finished.

Condition codes_ A group of flags in the 68000 that gives information about the previous instruction, such as whether an operand or result was zero or whether an overflow occurred.

Condition codes register The 68000 register that contains the condition codes. This
register, called CCR, is the lower half of the status register.
Contents The bytes ina heap block that contain the data stored there by the program;
that is, everything in a heap block except the header.
Data fork The part of a file that does not contain resources. The data fork contains a
stream of bytes that has no meaningful format to the system.
Data register direct

A 68000 addressing mode in which the operand is the contents of

a data register.
Debugger A program that assists a programmer in finding and removing bugs.

Definition function

A routine that is used by one of the Toolbox Managers to draw

and maintain a user-interface item, such as a control, menu, window, or list (for the List

Manager). Also called a defproc, short for definition procedure.
Defproc

See definition function.

Dereferencing

Obtaining data from a

structure using an indirect reference (a

pointer).

Deskaccessory

A program that appears in the Apple menu, which can be used while

an application is running.

Destination operand

The second operand in a 68000 assembly language instruction.

This operand receives the results of arithmetic instructions.
Device driver

A program that controls the operation of a hardware device, such as a

disk drive or the audio output, or that implements a special input or output feature,
such as sound output or graphics pad input.
Diagnostic output

A debugging technique in which the programmer inserts instruc-

tions to write information to a printer, the screen, or an external terminal.

Dialog box

A window that a Macintosh program can display to report or request

information.
Dialog record A data structure that contains information about a dialog box. Dialog

records cannot be relocatable objects.
Disassembly

The process of decoding machine language instructions into assembly

language, the reverse of assembly.
Double bus fault

A catastrophic failure of the 68000 in which an exception occurs

while a previous exception is being processed. A double bus fault causes the system to
restart.

Double-dereferencing

The technique of deriving the address of an object from its

handle, which contains the address of a master pointer.

Glossary

Dynamically allocated

Created in memory at the time a program is run, rather than

reserving space at the time the program is created by a compiler or assembler.

Effective address

The location of an operand in a 68000 instruction. An operand’s

effective address is computed with one of the 68000’s addressing modes.
Epilog

1) Theend ofa procedure or function, which destroys the stack frame with an

UNLK instruction, saves the return address, pops the parameters, and returns to the

caller. 2) The part of a ROM patch that is executed following the original ROM call’s
code.
Exception A

special situation detected by the 68000 which causes a predetermined

routine to execute. Examples of 68000 exceptions include address error, nonmaskable

interrupt, and line 1010 exception (A-trap).
Exception vector

A low-memory location that contains the address of a routine to be

executed when an exception occurs.
Exclusive-or

See logical exclusive-or.

Explicit dereferencing

The action of writing an instruction that uses the value of a

handle to obtain a pointer to a relocatable block. A pointer obtained this way is valid

only until a heap compaction occurs.
Explicit type coercion

A technique in

Cand MPW Pascal that allows a variable to be

used in an expression that requires a different type. Also called typecasting.
External reference A

call to a procedure or function that is not in the caller’s code

segment.

Filemanager

The part of the Macintosh Operating System that handles file functions,
such as creating, opening, closing, reading, and writing.

File reference number An integer, assigned whena file is opened, that is used to refer
to that file in File Manager calls.
Flags (byte)

The first byte of a master pointer, which contains information about the

master pointer.

Format code. An integer that specifies whether a SANE call uses an extendedprecision, double-precision, single-precision, integer, long integer, or computational
value.
Fragmentation The situation that occurs when free space in a heap is divided into
several pieces. Since heap objects must consist of contiguous bytes, fragmentation
causes applications to run out of memory while free memory is still available in the
heap.
Frame pointer

A 68000 address register that is used to point to a program or proce-

dure’s variables and parameters.

Free (block)

A type of heap block that contains unused bytes.

Genetic application An application defined by MacApp that implements the standard behavior of Macintosh applications, including resizable windows, menus, and
desk accessories.

405

406

Glossary

Global frame pointer

The address register A5, which is used to locate an application's

global variables.

Glue routine A procedure or function that allows a high-level language to call the
ROM. Also simply called glue.
GrafPort A QuickDraw data structure that defines a complete environment for drawing, including a bitmap, pen and pattern information, and font information. Grafports
cannot be relocatable objects.

Gross bug A massive error in a program that completely prevents the intended
feature from functioning.
Grow

To enlarge a heap by moving its end higher in memory.

Grow zone function

A function that is called by the Memory Manager when it can’t

find enough memory to fulfill a request for memory in a heap. The function, which is
usually implemented by the application, should try to free some memory.

Growable heap space The memory above the end of a heap and below the top of the
stack that a heap can claim by moving its limit pointer. The MaxApplZone procedure
automatically claims all of a heap’s growable space.
Handle

The address of a master pointer to a relocatable block in the heap.

Heap zone

An area in memory that may be allocated in relocatable and nonrelocat-

able pieces, called heap blocks or heap objects. A heap zone is also simply called a heap.
Heap zone header

A 52-byte data structure that precedes every heap and gives

information about the heap, such as the address of the first available master pointer, the

number of free bytes, and the address of the last block in the heap.
Hook A

pointer, usually in the system globals area, to a routine that is called in

specified situations and through which a programmer can provide special features.
Horizontal retrace period

The period after the electron beam stops drawinga line of

dots on the screen and moves back to the left edge of the screen. Also called the
horizontal blanking period (HBL).
ID

An integer that is used to identify a resource of a particular type.

Immediate addressing

A 68000 addressing mode in which the operand is specified

right after the instruction.
Implicit dereferencing

The action of obtaining a pointer to a relocatable block with-

out the programmer having written an instruction to obtain the pointer. This can occur
in Pascal with statements and function and procedure calls. A pointer obtained this way

is valid only until a heap compaction occurs.
Implied addressing

A 68000 addressing mode in which the operand is a register

specified in the instruction itself. Also called implied register addressing.
Indexed register indirect addressing

A 68000 addressing mode in which the oper-

and’s address is obtained by adding the contents of an address register to an index and
an offset.

Glossary

Indexed register indirect with offset

A 68000-family addressing mode in which the

operand’s address is obtained by adding the contents of an address register to an index,
a register offset, and a data offset.
Instruction

A command that is understood and carried out by a microprocessor.

Jump table A data structure that an application’s procedures and functions use to call

routines outside their own code segment.

Last in, first out A data structure that is capable of adding and removing objects, and
in which the last object added will be the first one removed. The 68000’s stack is a last in,

first out structure. Also called LIFO.
Library

Acollection of routines that are gathered together and compiled or assembled
and can then be linked to an application.
Loaded

Currently in memory and locked (refers to a code segment).

Local frame pointer An address register, usually A6, that is specified in a LINK instruction and is used to locate a procedure or function’s local variables and parameters.
Lock Anattribute of relocatable objects that temporarily prevents them from moving
in the heap.
Logical and

An operation in which the bit of both the source and destination operands must be set in order to set the result bit.

Logical clipping A drawing technique in which the program attempts to narrow the
amount of drawing as much as possible before performing any QuickDraw drawing
operations.
Logical exclusive-or An operation in which the bit of either the source or the destination operand, but not both, must be set in order to set the result bit.

Logical not An operation in which the state of each bit of the source operand
is changed. The result is called the complement, or one’s complement, of the operand.
Logical or An operation in which the bit of either the source or the destination
operand, or both, must be set in order to set the result bit.
Logical size The number of bytes in a heap block requested by the caller. The actual
number of bytes used by the block will be larger. See physical size.
Long branch A
displacement.

relative branch in a 68000 instruction that is specified by a 16-bit

Longjump A 68000 JMP instruction that uses a 32-bit address as its destination.
Main event loop The part of an application that continuously waits for user action,
usually by calling GetNextEvent. Also simply called the main loop.
Mainsegment The code segment ofan application that contains the main body of the
program. The main segment is also called the blank segment and is always CODE
resource 1.

Mark

The position in a file from which the next read will get information or into

which the next write will put information.

407

408

Glossary

Master pointer A data structure in a heap that contains the address of a relocatable
block. The Memory Manager will update a master pointer after it relocates a block.
Master pointer block A group of master pointers allocated together as a single heap
block. There are usually 64 master pointers in an application heap’s master pointer
block.
Memoty indirect addressing A 68000-family addressing mode in which the operand’s address is obtained from a memory location.
Memory Manager

The part of the Operating System that controls the allocation of

heap blocks.
Menu bar

The list of menu titles across the top of the Macintosh screen.

Mnemonic

A code that uses familiar words to represent a 68000 instruction. Assem-

blers translate mnemonics into machine language instructions.

Nonpurgeable An attribute of a heap block that prevents it from being removed from
memory by the Memory Manager unless the application explicitly deallocates it. A
nonpurgeable heap block may be made purgeable by calling the Memory Manager
procedure HPurge.
Nonrelocatable

An attribute of a heap block that prevents it from being moved. A

nonrelocatable heap block, once allocated, can never be made relocatable.
Not

See logical not.

Operand A

value that is used by a 68000 instruction to perform its operation. An

operand is similar to a parameter of a high-level language procedure.
Operation code

An integer that specifies which mathematical function will be per-

formed by a SANE call.

Optimization The practice of improving on a compiler’s standard output by including techniques that make the object code faster or smaller, or both.
Opword

An integer that is formed by computing the logical or of

aSANE

format code

and an operation code. The opword specifies the complete SANE operation to be

performed.
Or

See logical or.

Package A collection of related routines that performs some function in the Toolbox
or Operating System. The Macintosh Plus includes some packages in ROM; previously,

all packages were loaded into RAM.
Parameter block A

data structure used for calling the File Manager or Device Man-

ager that specifies all the relevant information for a call, including the file and the
volume or directory.
Patch

1) An addition or correction to a ROM routine that is applied by using Set-

TrapAddress. 2) Any addition or connection to a previously written routine.
Physicalsize

The number of bytes actually used by a heap block, including its header.

See also logical size.

Glossary

Positioning mode

The method for movinga file’s mark that allows the programmer to

specify that the mark should be positioned relative to the beginning of the file, the end
of the file, or the current mark.
Postincrement register indirect (addressing)

A 68000 addressing mode in which the

operand’s address is obtained from an address register, following which the contents of

the address register are incremented by the size of the operand (byte, word, or long
word).
Pragma

Indicates a compiler option in MPW C compiler.

Predecrement register indirect (addressing)

A 68000 addressing mode in which the

operand’s address is obtained from an address register after the processor first decre-

ments the contents of the address register by the size of the operand (byte, word, or long
word).

Preflighting

The practice of trying to ensure that an operation has a good chance of

success before the operation is started.
Preserving the port

The practice of saving the current GrafPort (the QuickDraw

global variable thePort) before changing it and then restoring it.
Process Manager

The part of System 7 that runs and switches among applications
and desk accessories, jobs formerly handled by MultiFinder.

Program counter

A 68000 register that contains the address of the next instruction to

be executed.

Program counter indirect with offset A 68000 addressing mode in which the operand’s address is obtained by adding an offset to the current program counter.

Program counter relative (addressing)

A 68000 addressing mode in which the oper-

and’s address is obtained from the current program counter.

Program counter relative (adding) with index and offset

A 68000 addressing mode

in which the operand’s address is obtained by adding an offset and an index to the
current program counter.

Program counter relative (addressing) with offset A 68000-family addressing mode
in which the operand’s address is obtained by addressing an offset to the current
program counter.

Prolog

1) The beginning of a procedure or function, which creates the stack frame
with a LINK instruction and makes local copies of any parameters, if necessary. 2) The
part of a ROM patch that is executed before running the original ROM call’s code.

Purgeable Anattribute of a heap block that allows the Memory Manager to remove it
if its space is needed for a memory allocation. A purgeable heap block may be made
nonpurgeable by calling the Memory Manager procedure HNoPurge.

Quick immediate data addressing A 68000 addressing mode in which the operand is
a 1-byte value specified in the instruction itself.
Range checking The process used by a Pascal compiler to verify that a value is within
its allowed range, such as string length and subrange values. Failed range checks result
in system error 5, check exception.

409

410

Glossary

Reentrancy The capability of a routine to be interrupted and allow the interrupthandling code to call the routine before the original call has completed.
Register

A memory location within the 68000 itself.

Register indirect (addressing) A 68000 addressing mode in which the operand’s
address is obtained from an address register.

Register indirect with offset A 68000 addressing mode in which the operand’s
address is obtained by adding the contents of an address register to an offset.
Relative addressing A set of 68000-family addressing modes in which the operand’s
address is obtained by computing an offset from a specified value, such as the program
counter or an address register.
Relative handle A

specially encoded handle used by the Memory Manager in a

relocatable block’s header.
Relocatable

An attribute of a heap block that allows the Memory Manager to move it
at certain well-defined times. A relocatable heap block, once allocated, can be made
temporarily immobile by locking it with the HLock call and can be made relocatable
again with the HUnlock call.

Resource A piece of data that can be accessed by its type and ID and is stored in a
resource file.
Resource attribute

A set of properties that a resource has that includes whether it will

be locked when loaded, whether it will be loaded into the system heap, and whether it
will be made purgeable when loaded.
Resource fork

The part of a file that contains specially indexed data called resources.

Resourcemap

Anindex containing information that tells how to find the resources in

a resource file.
Returnaddress

The address, saved by the 68000 when a subroutine is called, to which

the subroutine will return when it finishes.

ROM call A call to the Macintosh User Interface Toolbox or Operating System. Same
as system call, A-trap, and trap.
Run-time library

A collection of routines that is necessary for the basic functioning of

a compiled program.
SADE

Standard Apple Debugging Environment, MPW’s source-level debugger,

rhymes with afraid.

SANE The Standard Apple Numerics Environment, a set of arithmetic features and
capabilities provided on all Apple computers; it conforms to the IEEE Standard 754 for
Binary Floating-Point Arithmetic.

Scale The Font Manager’s technique for resizing the bits of a font in an existing size to
display it in a different size.
Screen flicker

The ugly flashing of the screen caused by the interaction between a

program’s drawing and the movement of the electron beam as it places dots on the
screen.

Glossary

Short branch A
displacement.
Short jump
Signature

relative branch in a 68000 instruction that is specified by an 8-bit

A 68000 JMP instruction that uses a 16-bit address as its destination.
A pattern of bytes common to all occurrences of a certain data structure,

which allows the person debugging to identify the structure.
Single-dereferencing The technique of using a handle to obtain a pointer to a relocatable block. A pointer obtained this way is only valid until a heap compaction occurs.
Also simply called dereferencing.
Size correction

The difference between a heap block's physical size and its logical size

plus its 8-byte header. A block’s size correction is the number of unused bytes past the
end of the block's logical size.
Skew

To begin a disassembly in the middle of an instruction, causing at least one

garbage instruction to be displayed.
Source operand

Stack

The first operand in a 68000 assembly language instruction.

The 68000’s LIFO data structure that is used for local and global variables,

parameter passing, return addresses, saved register values, and more.

Stack frame The data ona specified part of the stack associated with the address ina
specific address register. See local frame pointer and global frame pointer.

Stack pointer

The address register A7, which points to the top of the stack. The stack

pointer is usually referred to as SP.

Static link A value pushed on the stack by the compiler that allows a procedure or
function to access the local variables of an outer procedure or function.

Static (variable) A variable that’s created in a C function but not destroyed when the
function ends. Its value is available the next time the function executes.
Status register A 68000 register that includes the condition codes register and various
status information about the 68000, including the current interrupt level. The status
register is called SR.

System call A call to the Macintosh User Interface Toolbox or Operating System.
Same as ROM call, A-trap, and trap.
System globals The area of low memory that contains global variables used to indicate the state of the system.

Systemheap The heap zone that is used mostly by operating system data structures.
You can find out where it starts by examining the global variable SysZone.
Tag byte

The first byte of a heap block header, which contains information about the

heap block.

Top of the stack The address pointed to by the stack pointer. The top of the stack is
the lowest address in the stack, since the stack grows downward in memory.

Trap A call to the Macintosh User Interface Toolbox or Operating System. Same as
system call, A-trap, and ROM call.

All

412

Glossary

Trap dispatcher The part of the Macintosh Operating System that determines the
proper address that ROM calls should jump to.

Trap recording

A debugger feature that records the occurrence of ROM calls for later

examination.

Trap word
Trash

The instruction word that constitutes a call to the Macintosh ROM.

To change the contents, especially of a register.

Two’s complement arithmetic A scheme for representing positive and negative
numbers, used by most microprocessors, in which setting the high bit indicates that a
number is negative.

Type

The general kind of a resource. A resource can be found by its type and ID.

Unloaded

Possibly in memory; if so, unlocked and possibly purgeable (refers to a

code segment).
User Area

The part of the TMON debugger that is extensible by writing additional

code.
Vertical retrace period

The period after the electron beam stops drawing the last line

of dots on the screen and moves back to the top left edge of the screen. Also called the
vertical blanking period (VBL).

Video/sound buffer The area of RAM that is displayed as bits on the screen and
played as sound from the speaker.
Whizzy

Neat, fancy, cool.

Window

An area on the screen, usually rectangular, in which most information in

Macintosh applications is displayed.
Windowrecord A datastructure that contains information about a window. Window
records cannot be relocatable objects.

Index

% _SRCHK call, 154, 176

Address register indirect with

index addressing, 172
AO register, 146, 269

Address registers, 317

A5 register, 111, 113, 114, 269, 318,

Allocation processes

348-49

heaps, 27-34

growth direction of, 55

grow zone functions of, 57-61
memory allocation processes
of, 26-27

memory blocks in, 62 (see also

A6 register, 112-14, 269

stacks, 26-27

A7 register, 268-69, 318

America Online, 20

Absolute data addressing, 322-23

Ampersand (&) operator, 120

69-71 (see also Memory

Absolute positioning mode, 306

Animation, smoothing, 281-83

Manager)

Address errors, 95, 98

Apple Computer, Inc., xxii

Addressing modes, 320-29

Apple Developer's Forum, 20

absolute data, 322-23

Apple Numerics Manual, 121, 130

addressing bytes, 321

Apple Programmers and Devel-

address register indirect with
index, 172
data register direct, 322

immediate, 321

immediate data, 323, 327-28

opers Association (APDA),

Blocks, memory)

Memory Manager calls and,

out-of-memory conditions,
55-61

section of memory, 22-25
segmentation and, 74-77
Applications

xxii, 20

debugging (see Debugging)

Application heaps

preserving values between,

accessing memory in (see

Dereferencing)

310

quitting, 309

implied, 328

allocation size of, 56

resources (see Resources)

memory indirect, 328

allocation structure of, 33

resuming, after system errors

program counter relative,

data structures of, 62-67

323-24

register direct, 322

data structures in (see Data

structures)

register indirect, 325-27

display of, 241-43

relative, 129

disposing of system objects in,

32-bit, xiii, 64, 368
Address register direct addressing, 322

353

dynamics of, 27-53

in, 297-98
segmenting, 74-77

structure of, 12-16
translations of, 11

ApplLimit global, 56, 61
ApplZone global, 24, 56
AppParmHandle global, 247

fragmentation of, 71-74

413

A414

Index

Arithmetic, integer, 143, 319-20,
331-32

Array variables, 124, 138, 161-62,
172

Assembly language

relocatable (see Relocatable
blocks

structure of, 62-67
Blood cells, red, lacking nuclei,
901

C++ language, 19
Calls. (See ROM calls)
Case statements, 165-68, 209
labels, 167-68

selectors, 167

addressing modes, 320-29

Borrowing concept, 319

CDEF resources, 16, 74, 271-72

compiler-generated code vs,

Branch instructions, 164, 339-42

ChangedResource call, 274

Breakpoints, 88, 206-7

Check exceptions, 342

Bugs. See also Crashes; Debug-

Checksums, 94

104

debugging and, 85
instructions (see Instructions,

assembly language)
integer arithmetic, 319-20

machine language and,

ging, Error checking;
System errors

calling the ROM at interrupt
time, 349-50

microprocessors and, 316-19

debuggers as source of, 93
detecting, 273-74

overview, 315-43

disposing of disposed blocks,

316

reading vs writing, 85, 316
Assignment statements, 123-38
Asterisk (*) assembler symbol, 129

A-traps. See ROM calls
Attributes, resource, 35
Autopostincrement addressing,
326

Autopredecrement addressing,
326

70

disposing of system objects,
353

forgetting to link with standard library, 176
fragmentation, 71-74, 244,
372-75

tions, 338

Binary-decimal conversion,

366-67

Bit manipulation instructions,
337-38
Bitmaps, animation with, 282-83

Blanking periods, 281

invalid register A5 values at
interrupt time, 348-49

nesting procedure pointers,
97, 345-46

orphaned resources, 275-80
patching patched traps, 351-52
relying on handles at interrupt
time, 349
text, 217-19

locking and unlocking, 34,
44-45, 69, 73
monitor, 58

nonrelocatable (see Nonrelocatable blocks)

physical vs logical size of, 65

Clipping, logical, 272-73

CloseDialog call, 176-78
CODE resources, 12-13, 73-76
Commando program, 18-19

Compaction, heap, 36-37
CompactMem call, 36-37
Comparison instructions, 340

Compilers. See also Object code
debugging of, 156

Blocks, memory, 27-28, 62

Handles; Pointers)

for, 116

Standard library, 176

implicit dereferences by (see

stack overflows, 61

free, 62

Pascal parameter convention

implicit dereferencing and,

BlockMove call, 71, 135
accessing (see Dereferencing;

function parameters, 146
implicit dereferences and, 52

grow zone function, 58

45-52, 346-48
Binary coded decimal instruc-

C language

Implicit dereferencing)
implicit ROM calls by, 38

improving code generated by,
168

microprocessors and, 106
optimization by, 45-46, 51-52,
104, 209
purposes and functions of,

9-10, 103-6

for resources, 13-15
run-time environment of, 186

types of, 81-83

CompuServe, 20

unbalanced stacks, 309

Conditional instructions, 164,

unloading segments, 77,
350-51

window-erase, 219-21
Built-in procedures and functions, 176

Bulletin-board services, xxii, 20
Bus errors, 95, 97, 213-17

339-40
Conditional statements, 162-68
case statements, 165-68

if statements, 162-65

switch statements, 165-68

Condition codes register, 319

Index

Constants
assignments, 124-28

Data register direct addressing,
322

in object code, 110

Data registers, 317

as parameters, 160

Data structures

short, 133

calculating sizes of, 108

finding window-erase bug,
219-21

as information-gathering
process, 85-91

looking for bus errors, 213-17

Contents of block, 64

common, in heaps, 244-49

(see also Bus errors)

Control definition functions, 16,

common, in ROM, 394-402

observation of running

74, 271-72

Control instructions, 339-42

dynamically allocated, 27

heap block headers, 64-67

415

programs, 198-206

optimization with debuggers,

Control Manager, 362

heap zone headers, 62-64

231-44

Counter, program, 73

jump table entries, 182-86

quick fixes, 231

Cow beneath the sea, 902

master pointers, 67-69

quick reference for, 377-402

CPU exceptions. See Exceptions

in object code, 106-10

rebuilding and rechecking

Crashes, 82

QuickDraw GrafPort, 71-72

bus errors, 213-17

signatures of, 245

common, 95-100

in system heap, 23-24

CPU exceptions and SysError

TextEdit, 244-46

calls, 95-97

programs, 221-31

sample program for (see
Showoff sample program)

setting breakpoints, tracing,

Data types. See Types, variable

and stepping through

finding cause of, 87-88

Debugger, The, 93

programs, 206-13

finding instruction execution

Debuggers, 84

that generated, 89-91
finding instruction that

generated, 88-89
finding location of, 86-91

hardware, 94

object code, 92-93

optimizing code with, 81,
231-44

tools, 91-94 (see also Debuggers)

trap recording, 88-89, 198, 203
worksheet, 91
Decompilers, resource, 14

nesting procedures, 97, 345-46

patching code with, 217

reboots, 99-100

as programs in memory, 93

common, containing, code, 74

screen garbage, 97-99

source code, 88, 91

creating, in high-level lan-

system errors and, 83-84 (see

source code walk-throughs vs

also System errors)
Cross-segment calls, 37-38, 184.
See also Jump tables

object code, 89
special-purpose, 93
Debugging

Definition functions, 16

guages, 271-72

DefltStack global, 56

Dereferencing. See also Handles
double, 31-32, 38-39, 48

CurApName global, 22

advice on, 100-101

CurJTOffset global, 174

article about, 248

glue routines and, 306

CurrentA5 global, 269

art of, 84-85

implicit (see Implicit derefer-

breakpoints, 88
Dangling pointer problems

bugs, crashes, and system

explicit, 39-45

encing)

single, 39

described, 30

errors, 81-84 (see also Bugs;

DeRez program, 14

explicit dereferencing and,

Crashes; System errors)

Desk accessories

42-44

implicit dereferencing and, 45-52

Data files, random access, 302-8
Data forks, 11
Data movement instructions,

329-30

of compilers, 156
data structures in heaps,
244-49

examining compiled code (see

Object code)
finding text bugs, 217-19

multitasking and, 73
as resources, 16

window records for, 72-73
Desk Manager, 364

DeskPattern global, 22
Destination operand, 322

416

Index

Developer Technical Support
group, Xv

ExitToShell call, 309

111-12. See also System

Explicit dereferencing, 39-45

globals

develop magazine, 17, 248

Explicit type coercion, 266-68

Glue routines, 180, 306

Development systems, 7-9, 17-20,

External references, 174-75

Goldman, Phil, 6

GrafPort structures, 71-72, 90

91, 93. See also Macintosh
Programmer's Workshop

File Manager, 5, 303-8, 371

Gross bugs, 219

(MPW)

Files

Growable heap space, 56

Device drivers, 5, 16

Dialog boxes, 3

moving resources between,

Grow zone functions, 57-59, 64

275-80

Dialog Manager, 364

parts of, 11

Dialog records, 72

random access I/O with, 302-8

Direct access file /O, 302-8

System, 5-6

Disassemblers, 93

Finder, 4

Discipline program, 82

FKEY resources, 74

Disk initialization, 367

Flags byte, 68

Handles

dereferencing (see Dereferencing; Pointers)
interrupt-driven routines and,

48, 349

invalid, 98

DisposHandle call, 62, 70, 353

Font Manager, 360-61

memory location of, 32

DisposPtr call, 70

Forehead, prosthetic, 903

Nil, 34, 274

DITL resources, 13

Forks, resource and data, 11

as parameters, 347

DLOG resources, 13

Format codes, SANE, 130

relative, 67

Double bus fault, 99

for statements, 170-72

relocatable blocks, master

Double-dereferencing, 31-32,

Fragmentation, 71-74, 244, 372-75

pointers, and, 31 (see also

Frame pointers, 113-14, 269

Master pointers; Relocat-

38-39, 48

Double-precision variables, 129

Frames, stack, 110-15

do... until/while statements,

Free blocks, 62

able blocks)

Hardware debuggers, 94

168-70

FSRead call, 307

HCreate call, 305

DrawChar call, 43

FSWrite call, 305

Headers

DRVR resources, 16, 74

Functions

Dynamically allocated data
structures, 27

Editors, resource, 13-15

Emulators, 94
Environments, development,

heap block, 64-67

built-in, 176

heap zone, 62-64

implicit dereferencing in, 348

HeapEnd global, 56

in object code, 141-62

Heaps. See also Application heaps;

parameters (see Parameters,

procedure and function)
results of, in double-

9-10, 17-20

dereferenced handles, 348
results of, in relocatable blocks,
47-48

data structures in (see Data

memory allocations and, 58

GetNamedResource call, 276

resources and, 34

GetNextEvent call, 206

ROM parameters and, 82

GetResource call, 11-12, 34, 186,

Exceptions, 86, 95, 97, 99, 342. See

also System errors

Handles; Pointers)
allocation processes of, 27-34
concept of, 28

System errors

techniques, 273-74

heaps
accessing (see Dereferencing;

Epilog code, 119, 351-52
Error checking. See also Bugs;

Blocks, memory; System

263-65

structures)

growth direction of, 55
:

GetTrapAddress call, 178-80, 302,
351

purging processes of, 34-35

relocation processes of, 35-39
sections of memory, 22-25

zone headers of, 62-64

Exception vector, 302

Global frame pointers, 113

Hertzfeld, Andy, 5-6

Executing code resources, 73-74

Global variables, 25, 106-9,

Hierarchical File System, 371

417

Index

HLock call, 34, 44-45, 69, 73
HNoPurge call, 35, 69

instructions, 331-32

Interrupt-driven routines

Logical instructions, 332-35
Logical operators, 164

HOpen call, 305

handles and, 48, 349

Logical size, 65

Horizontal retrace period, 281

invalid register A5 values,

Logic analyzers, 94

HPurge call, 35, 69

348-49

HUnlock call, 34, 44-45, 69, 73

relocation and, 42

MacApp libraries, 19, 93

Huxham, Fred, 248

ROM calls and, 349-50

MacCollege, xv

Icons, 4

IDs, resource, 11

Interrupt switch, 92

Machine language, 316

Intersegment calls, 37-38, 184. See

Macintosh 512K, 355-56

also Jump tables

if statements, 162-65

Macintosh Plus, 355-75

Immediate addressing, 321

Jasik, Steve, 93

Immediate data addressing, 323,

Johnson, Bob, 248

327-28
Implicit dereferencing

by compilers, 45-52

Macintosh 512K Enhanced, 372

Jump tables

assembly language jumps and,
341

Binary-decimal conversion,
366-67

Control Manager, 362
Desk Manager, 364

Dialog Manager, 364

function calls and, 348

in object code, 175-76, 180-86

procedure calls and, 347

PC-relative addressing vs, 144

File Manager, 371

with statements and (see with

register, 318

Font Manager, 360-61

statements)

Disk Initialization, 367

List Manager, 367

Implicit ROM calls, 38

Labels, case, 167-68

Memory Manager, 367-69

Implied addressing, 328

Languages, xxi-xxii, 8, 10, 19, 104.

Menu Manager, 362-63

In-circuit emulators, 94

See also Assembly language;

Operating System utilities, 371

Indexed register indirect with

C language; Pascal

Package Manager, 366

offset addressing, 327

language

QuickDraw, 359-60

Launch call, 247, 310

Resource Manager, 357-59

Initialization code, 68, 76

LDEF resources, 74

Scrap Manager, 365

INIT resources, 74

Libraries

segment clotting problem,

Indirect calls, 37

Inside Macintosh book, xv, xxi, 17

MacApp, 19, 93

Installer programs, 275-80

Pascal run-time, 154

Instructions, assembly language

ROM calls and, 9-10

Standard File, 366

routines in object code, 173-75

TextEdit, 363-64

Standard, 176

Toolbox, 365

binary coded decimal, 338

bit manipulation, 337-38

372-75

Segment Loader, 370

data movement, 329-30

LIFO stack management, 26

trap dispatcher, 356-57

format of, 316-19

Linkers, 10, 104, 173-75

Window Manager, 361-62

integer arithmetic, 331-32

Listings, source, 90, 92

linking and unlinking, 114-15

List Manager, 367

logical, 332-35

LoadSeg call, 76, 182-86

debugger, 91

program control, 339-42

LoadTrap global, 184

as development environment,

shift and rotate, 336-37

Local frame pointers, 113-14, 269

system control, 342

Local variables, 25, 108-10, 112

system errors as result of

Locked blocks, 34, 44-45

single, 83, 88-89
variants, 330

Integer arithmetic, 143, 319-20

Locking processes, 34, 44-45, 69, 73
Logical clipping, 272-73

Logical errors, 82

Macintosh Programmer's

Workshop (MPW)

18-19
languages, xxii, 104

resource tools, 13-14
Macintosh Programming Primer

books, xv
Macintosh Programming

Secrets, 57

418

Index

Macintosh technical notes, 17,
272, 375

MacNosy debugger, 93
MacsBug debugger, xxii

debugging with (see Showoff
sample program)
Log command, 189
Step command, 207

Step Spy command, 94
Trace command, 184, 207
version, 189

Heaps; System heaps)

desk accessories and, 73

locking and unlocking blocks

memory map for, 24-25

of, 34, 44-45, 69, 73

Memory Manager calls, 69-71
(see also Memory Manager)
multitasking and, 24-25 (see
also Multitasking)

memory usage and, 62

preserving values between
applications with, 310
quitting applications with, 309
versions of, 4-6

out-of-memory conditions,
55-61
preflight checking allocations,

263-65

Nesting procedures, 97, 345-46

NewHandle call, 25, 30-33, 36-37,
69-70

Main event loop, 75

purging processes, 34-35

NewPtr call, 25, 33, 36-37, 70

Main segments, 12-13, 75-76, 370

relocation processes, 35-39

Newsletters, xxii

Maps

sections of, 22-25

Nil handle, 34

memory, 22-25

segmentation, 74-77

Non-application resources, 16

resource, 11

stacks (see Stacks)

Nonpurgeable blocks, 35

virtual, 11-12

Nonrelocatable blocks, 35, 62

Mark, Dave, xv
Marks, file position, 305

Memory indirect addressing, 328

allocation processes of, 33

Master pointers

Memory Manager, 5

fragmentation and, 71-74, 244

blocks of, 68, 71, 246

calls, 69-71

data structure of, 67-69

calls at interrupt time, 349-50

Numeric assignments, 128-33

managing, 63, 247, 248

calls that cause relocation, 37

Numeric variables, 121

as relative handles, 67

Macintosh Plus, 367-69

relocatable blocks, handles,

timing of relocation by, 35

and, 30-31 (see also Derefer-

Menu bar, 3

encing; Handles; Relocat-

Menu definition functions, 16, 74,

able blocks)
single dereferencing with, 38

32-bit, 368

ment code, 186

compilers and, 103-6

Menu Manager, 362-63

data structures, 106-10 (see also

MaxMem call, 36-37

Microprocessors

MDEF resources, 16, 74, 271-72

address errors and, 98

MemError global, 263

assembly language and,

accessing (see Dereferencing;

Handles; Pointers)

allocation processes, 26-27
blocks of, 62 (see also Blocks,
memory)

Compilers
compiler run-time environ-

271-72

MENU resources, 13, 35

Memory

Object code, 104-5. See also

Menu List global, 24

MaxApplZone call, 57, 61, 71, 248

memFullErr error, 58

types of, 71-72

315-19

object code and, 106
Mnemonics, 317

Monitor block technique, 58
MoreMasters call, 63, 68, 70, 247,
248

Data structures)
parameters, 116-22

register optimization code,

186-87

stack frames, 110-15
statements (see Statements)

variables (see Variables)

Object code debuggers, 89, 90,
92-93

Object-oriented programming, 19

MoveHHii call, 34, 73

Offsets, stack, 110-11

data structures in, 62-67 (see

MOVE instructions, 328, 329-30

also Data structures)

On-line services, xxii, 20

MPW. See Macintosh Program-

fables, 21-22

fragmentation, 71-74
heaps (see Application heaps;

mer’s Workshop (MPW)

Operands, 317, 322

Operating System. See also

MultiFinder. See Multitasking

Multitasking; ROM calls;

Multitasking, 4

Toolbox

Index

addresses in different versions

of, 201

heap objects, disposing of, 353

Parameters, ROM call, 82, 89-90,
178-80

Pascal language

419

Problems. See Bugs; Error

checking; System errors
Procedures

Macintosh Plus, 371

heaps in, 28

built-in, 176

preserving values between

nesting procedures in, 97,

calling other procedures with,

applications, 310
quitting applications, 309
random access file I/O, 302-8
ROM calls and changing,
301-2

345-46

object-oriented programming,
19

in object code, 141-62

run-time library routines, 154

parameters (see Parameters,

Standard library, 176

system software, 5-6

type checking, 40, 266-68

techniques, 301-11
Optimization

avoiding trap dispatcher, 302
of compiler-generated code,
168

by compilers, 45-46, 51-52,
104, 209

units, 125

with statements (see with

statements)

Program counter relative ad-

Program counter relative

addressing
Physical size, 65

275-80

Overflows, stack, 59-61

339-42

Patches, 217
PC-relative addressing. See

with registers, 186-87

Out-of-memory conditions, 55-61

also Multitasking
Program control instructions,

Program counter, 73, 318

PDEF resources, 74

Orphaned resource problems,

procedure and function)
Process Manager, 5-6, 24-25. See

PasLib library, 176

with debuggers, 81, 231-49
Opwords, SANE, 130

implicit dereferencing in, 347

parameter convention, 116

System 7, xxiii, 6, 73, 310, 368

Operation codes, SANE, 130

112-13
errors in nesting, 97, 345-46

Pointers

assignment, 135
dangling (see Dangling pointer

dressing, 143-44, 323-24
Programming. See also Applica-

tions; Debugging; Memory;
Optimization; Resources
books about, xv, xxi, 17, 57,
121, 130

development systems, 17-20,
91,93

problems)

languages (see Languages)

global frame, 113

Macintosh development

invalid, 98

environments, 7-9 (see also

Package definition functions, 74

local frame, 113-14

Macintosh Programmer's

Package Manager, 366

master (see Master pointers)

Packages, 16, 74, 86

nesting procedure, 97, 345-46

Macintosh vs conventional, 3-4

Packed variables, 108, 126

parameters passed by, 158-62

multitasking and, 5-6 (see also

PACK resources, 74, 86

stack, 26, 111-13, 268-69, 318

Parameters, procedure and

function

Polk, Mr. James K. (Napoleon of

the stump), 904

Workshop(MPW))

Multitasking)

object-oriented, 19
organization of this book

constants as, 147-51, 160

Positioning mode, 306

handles as, 347

Postincrement register indirect

patching code, 217

addressing, 325-27

principles, xv-xvii

multiple, 125

about, xix-xxiii

in object code, 116-22, 141-62

PowerBook, xxiii

quick fixes, 231

passed by pointers, 158-60

Power tools, 17-20

requirements for, xxi-xxii

responsibility for removing,

Precision, numeric, 129

sources of information about,

110, 146
value as, 120, 147-58

variables as, 46-47, 120-22,
158-62

Predecrement register indirect

XXxil

addressing, 325-27

system software and, 5, 37 (see

Preflighting technique, 263-65

also Operating System;

Preserving the port technique, 220

ROM calls)

420

Index

Programming. (cont.)

techniques (see Techniques)

Prolog code, 351-52
Purgeable blocks, 34-35

predecrementing and postincrementing, 326

ROM calls with parameters in,
178-80

PurgeProc call, 35

rules for using, 268-70

Purging processes, 34-35

stack frame pointers, 111-14

Quadra, xxiii

TextEdit use of, 296

Questions, debugging, 85-91

variables in, 109

QuickDraw, 5

with statement use of, 50-52

status, 318

accessing, with same type and
ID, 276

applications and, 10-12
compilers, decompilers, and

editors for, 13-15
containing executable code,
73-74

creating applications with,
12-16

error checking and, 34, 273-74

bitmap animation, 282-83

Relative addressing, 129

heap locations of, 25

data structure, 71-72

Relative handles, 67

moving, between files, 275-80

debugging using, 219-21

Relocatable blocks, 22, 30, 35, 62

non-application, 16

globals, 136-38, 269

logical clipping in, 272-73
Macintosh Plus, 359-60

window updating with,

283-95
Quick immediate data addressing, 327

accessing (see Dereferencing;
Pointers)

fragmentation and locked, 73,
244

handles, master pointers, and,

Range-checking

described, 131-133

Rez program, 14

Ringewald, Erich, 6

relocation of, 42
locking and unlocking, 34,
44-45, 69, 73

purging, 34-35

system errors, 155

relocating, 35-39

ReallocHandle call, 36-37

Relocation processes, 35-39

Reboot errors, 99-100

repeat ... until/while statements,

Records

assignment of, 135-38
as parameters, 156-58

Retrace periods, 281
Return instruction, 341-42

31 (see also Handles; Master

routine, 154, 176

Rebuilding programs, 216-17

structure of, 11

ResrvMem call, 37

pointers)

interrupt-driven routines and

Random access file I/O, 302-8

purging, 34-35

168-70
Repetitive statements, 168-72

do... until/while statements,
168-70

Rollin, Keith, 57

ROM calls. See also Operating
System; Toolbox

addresses of, 302
changing operating systems

and, 301-2
error checking, 82

format of, 9-10

implicit, by compilers, 38
interface routines, 176-80
interrupt-driven routines and,

349-50

Reed, Cartwright, xv

for statements, 170-72

overhead of, 135

Reentrancy problems, 349-50

repeat ... until/while state-

parameters of, 82, 89-90,

References, external, 174-75
Register direct addressing, 322

Register indirect addressing,
325-27

Registers

ments, 168-70

while statements, 168-70
ResEdit program, 14-15
ResErr global, 263, 274

178-80

patching patched, 351-52
random access file I/O with,
302-8

ResError call, 263, 274

recording, 88-89

assembly language use of, 318

ResErrProc global, 274

register-based, 178-80

condition codes, 319

Resource Manager, 10-12, 357-59.

relocation caused by, 35-39

data and address, 317
interrupt-time and A5, 348-49
optimization code using,

186-87

See also Resources
Resources. See also Resource
Manager

setting bits with, 69
stepping through, 207
tracing, between segments,
184

Index

Rose, Caroline, 17

initial source code for, 189-98

Rotate instructions. See Shift and

nonoptimized source code for,
230-40

rotate instructions

Run-time library routines, 154
SADE (Standard Apple Debug-

Statements
assignment, 123-38
conditional, 162-68

optimizing, 231-49

jump tables and, 180-86

running, 198-206

library routines, 173-76

stepping through, 206-13

procedure and function calls,

ging Environment) debug-

text bug in, 217-19

ger, 91

version with automatic

141-62
repetitive, 168-72

window updating, 284-95

SANE (Standard Apple Numerics
Environment)

window-erase bug in, 219-21

function opwords, 130

Signatures of data objects, 245

variables, 121 .

ROM interface routines,
176-80 (see also ROM calls)
with (see with statements)

Single dereferencing, 39

Static link, 346

Scope of variables, 108, 110

Single-precision variables, 129

Static variables, 25, 108-9

scrap Manager, 365

68000-series microprocessors. See

Status register, 318

Scratch registers, 146, 187
Screen buffer, 22-24

StdCLib library, 176

Microprocessors
Size

Stepping, 207

correction of block, 66

String assignments, 133-35

Screen format, 3

of data types, 61, 108, 109

Structured variables

screen-garbage crash, 97-99

heap space, 56-59

ScrnBase global, 24

logical vs physical, for blocks, 65

Segmentation, 74-77

stack, 59-61

Screen flicker, 281-83

Segment clotting problems,

assignment of, 135-38

.

SIZE resources, 24

Sniffer, stack, 59

372-75
Segment Loader, 370
Segments

Source code, 104-5. See also
Statements

application code, 74-76
calls between, 37-38 (see also

Jump tables)

421

Source code debuggers, 88, 91
Source code walk-throughs, 89,
90, 91-92

as parameters, 156-58, 160-62

Structures, data. See Data structures

Structures, memory. See Blocks,
memory; Variables
Switcher program, 5-6

switch statements, 165-68
SysError call, 86, 95-96
System 7, xxiii, 6, 73, 310, 368

main, 12-13, 75-76, 370

Source operands, 322

System calls. See ROM calls

tracing calls between, 184

Special-purpose debuggers, 93

System control instructions, 342

unloading, 76-77, 350-51

Stack crawl technique, 203

System Error Handler, 86

Stacks

System errors. See also Bugs; Error

Selectors, case, 167

Servant program, 6

allocation processes of, 26-27

SetFPos call, 306

frames, 110-15

bus errors, 213-17

SetHandleSize call, 36, 67

growth direction of, 27, 55,

crashes and, 83-84, 95-97 (see

SetPtrSize call, 36, 67

111, 318

SetTrapAddress call, 351

handles as variables in, 32

Shift and rotate instructions,

overflows, 59-61

336-37

©

Showoff sample program

bus error in, 213-17
C language translation of,
249-59

corrected source code for,
222-30

pointers, 26, 111-13, 268-69,
318

checking

also Crashes)
generated by CPU exceptions,
97

generated by SysError, 96
out-of-memory, 55-61

section of memory, 22-25

range-checking, 155

sniffer, 59

as result of single instruction,

unbalanced, 309
Standard File package, 86, 366
Standard library routines, 176

83, 88-89

resuming applications after,
297-98

422

Index

System file, 5-6

records, 244-46

System globals

TheMenu global, 22

Tricks. See Techniques

alphabetical listing of, 378-85

thePort global, 221, 269

Two’s complement arithmetic,

applications, 24, 56, 57, 61, 71,

THINK C and Pascal develop-

247, 248
System globals (cont.)

debugging and, 90

ment systems, 19, 91, 93

Third-party tools and languages,
19-20, 91, 93

Trap word, 176

143, 319-20
Types, resource, 11

Types, variable

explicit type coercion, 266-68

errors, 263, 274

TickCount call, 282

as parameters, 122

heap growth, 56-59

Ticks global, 282

type casting, 40

jump table offset, 174, 181

Tips. See Techniques

sizes of, 61

LoadSeg, 184

TMON debugger, 217

numerical listing of, 386-93

Toolbox

QuickDraw, 136-38, 269
registers, 269

retrace periods, 282
section of memory for, 22-25
system heaps, 24

System heaps

automatic window updating,
283-95

definition functions in

UnloadSeg call, 76-77, 185, 350

logical clipping with Quick-

System software, 5, 37. See also
Operating System;

Draw, 272-73

Macintosh Plus, 365

moving resources between
files, 275-80

resuming applications after

ROM calls

system errors, 297-98

SystemTask call, 268

smoothing animation, 281-83

Syszone global, 24

340-41

271-72

error detection, 273-74

preserving values between

System objects, disposing of, 353

Unconditional instructions,

Units, Pascal, 125

heap objects, disposing of, 353

applications with, 310

Unbalanced stacks problem, 309

high-level languages,

objects in, 25

section of memory, 22-25

UCSD Pascal, 28

TextEdit hooks, 295-97
Tools, debugging, 91-94

Unlocking processes, 34, 44-45,
69,73

UseNet, 20

User interface elements, 3-4. See
also Resources

User Interface Toolbox. See
Toolbox
Users’ groups, xxii
Utilities, programming, 8, 17-20

Value parameters
in object code, 147-58

Tag byte, 66

Debugger, The, 93

Technical notes, 17, 272, 375

hardware debuggers, 94

Techniques

MacNosy, 93

array, 124, 138, 161-62, 172

object code debuggers, 89, 90,

assignment of, 123-38

avoiding fragmentation, 72-73
explicit type coercion, 266-68

92-93

monitor block, 58

source code debuggers, 88, 91

Operating System techniques,

source code walk-throughs,

301-11

preflighting, 263-65

89, 91-92

special-purpose debuggers, 93

variable vs, 120

Variables

compiler allocation for,
106-110

global, local, and static, 25
locating, with stack pointers,
111-12

register usage, 268-70

Tools, programming, 8, 17-20

packing, 108, 126

Toolbox techniques, 271-99

Top of the stack, 26, 318

as parameters, 46-47, 120-22,

Terminology conventions, xx-xxi

Tracing, 207-13

TextEdit

Translations of applications, 11

SANE, 121

158-62

debugging using, 217-19

Trap dispatcher, 302, 356-57

scope of, 108, 110

hooks, 295-97

Trap recording, 88-89, 198, 203

single-precision, 129

Macintosh Plus, 363-64

Traps. See ROM calls

sizes and types of, 61

Index

stack, 25, 35 (see also Stacks)
structured, 135-38, 156-58,

Volume Control Block (VCB)

structures, 24

160-62

system global (see System
globals)

90, 91-92

type casting, 40

WDEF resources, 16, 74, 271-72

type coercion, explicit, 266-68

while statements, 168-70

Vertical Retrace Manager, 281
Vertical retrace period, 281

Windows, 3

automatic updating, 283-95
erase bug, 219-21

Walk-throughs, source code, 89,

Window definition functions, 16,
74, 271-72

Video buffer, 22-24

Window Manager, 361-62

Virtual memory, 11-12

Window records, 71-72

423

WIND resources, 13
Wirth, Niklaus, 121

with statements, 172-73
implicit dereferencing by,
49-52, 304

Worksheet for debugging, 91
Zones, heap. See Heaps

How Not to Type in the Programs from
How to Write Macintosh Software

You can order the disk that accompanies

How to Write Macintosh Software,
Third Edition. This disk contains the source
code for the book’s program listings, plus
possibly some obscure song references, hidden conspiracy theories,
and a few more insanities and inanities that didn’t fit into the book
(although you shouldn't set your expectations too high). To order:

1. Fill out the coupon below. PRINT FAITHFULLY. For creative types
and those who hate to mutilate books: design your own coupon.

2. Include a check or money order for $20us (or a copy of the scarce book
The Ridiculously Expensive MAD in any condition) made payable to
Upstairs Company.

3. Send the coupon and the check or money order to

How to Write Macintosh Software disk
714 Fairlands Ave.

Campbell, CA 95008

Enclosed is a check or money order for $20Us made payable to Upstairs

Company. Please send a How to Write Macintosh Software disk to:
Name

Company

Address

City, State, and ZIP or
significant postal alternative

Maeintosh

“A good Macintosh consultant will cost you
this book is probably worth about $25,000.”

500-$800 per day. | figure that, at this rate,
—MaclinTouch

“This is the only book to get for serious debugging applications.”
—MacTimes

“If you’re already an accomplished programmer and you want to know why your programs
don’t run worth a darn, you read Knaster.”
—Macworld
How to Write Macintosh Software, Third Edition is your best source for understanding
Macintosh programming techniques. Drawing from his years of experience working with
programmers, Scott Knaster explains the mysteries and myths of Macintosh programming.

With his famed wit and humor, Knaster covers all you’ll need to know about Macintosh
memory management and debugging software.

The third edition, fully revised and updated, covers System 7 and 32-bit developments, and
explores such topics as:
=TM how and where things are stored in memory

=TM what things in memory can be moved around and when they may be moved
= how to debug your applications with MacsBug
=TM how to examine your program’s code to learn precisely what’s going on when it runs
Plus, dozens of tips, tricks, and techniques show you how to make your programs run
smoothly. How to Write Macintosh Software, Third Edition will give you the edge you need
to write powerful Macintosh software.

SCOTT KNASTER is a well-known figure in the Macintosh community. He worked at Apple

Computer, Inc., for more than seven years as a

Technical Support Manager and now works at General

Secrets (Addison-Wesley, 1992) and is Series Editor

||

Magic. He is the author of Macintosh Programming

of Addison-Wesley’s premier Macintosh programming

||

52 895

series, Macintosh Inside Out.
Cover design by Jean Seal
Cover illustration by Angelo Torres

ADDISON-WESLEY PUBLISHING COMPANY

9

"780201608052
ISBN

O-201-608 os-?7

b

si

