e

DI
Includes Color Quick.Draw'" and
32-bit Quick.Draw'"
DAVID A. SU ROVELL .
FREDERICK M. HALL
KONSTANTIN OTHMER

Programming QuickDraw™

-

Programming QuickDraw™
Includes Color QuickDraw™
and 32-bit QuickDraw™

David A. Surovell, Frederick M. Hall, and
Konstantin Othmer

.A.
......
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc.
Reading, Massachusetts Menlo Park, California New York
Don Mills, Ontario Wokingham, England Amsterdam Bonn
Sydney Singapore Tokyo Madrid San Juan
Paris Seoul Milan Mexico City Taipei

------.

Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to
distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those
designations appear in this book and Addison-Wesley was aware of
a trademark claim, the designations have been printed in initial
capital letters.
The authors and publishers have taken care in preparation of this book,
but make no expressed or implied warranty of any kind and assume
no responsibility for errors or omissions. No liability is assumed for
incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out
of the use of the information or programs contained herein.
Library: of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Surovell, David A.
Programming QuickDraw : includes color QuickDraw and 32-bit
QuickDraw I David A. Surovell, Frederick M. Hall, and Konstantin
Othmer.
p.
an. -- (Macintosh inside out)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-201-57019-X (p) : $26.9S
1. Macintosh (Computer)--Programming. 2. Computer jlr&phics.
3. QuickDraw. I. Hall, Frederick M. Il. Othmer, Konstanun.
ID. Title. IV. Series.
QA76.8.M3S86 1992
006.6' 76--dc20
91-40339

CIP

Copyright © 1992 by David A. Surovell, Frederick M. Hall, and
Konstantin Othmer
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior written permission of the publisher. Printed in the
United States of America. Published simultaneously in Canada.
Sponsoring Editor: Carole McClendon
Technical Reviewer: Tim Cotter
Project Editor: Joanne Clapp Fullagar
Cover Design: Ronn Campisi
Set in 10.5-point Palatino by CIP

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 -MW- 9594939291

First printing, December 1991

Dedication
This book is dedicated to our parents:
Edward and Barbara Surovell
Robert and Ann Hall
Ekkehard and Sieglinde Othmer

'

Contents

Foreword by Scott Knaster xiii
Acknowledgments xv
Introduction xvii
1. Graphics Programming Overview 1
Introduction to Graphics Environments 2
Personal Computer Graphics: A Brief Look Backward 2
Why Is Graphics Programming Difficult? 4
Introduction to Macintosh Graphics Environments 4
What's in the Toolbox? 7
QuickDraw 9
Doing It Yourself: The Path Not Taken 10
Defining a Practical Programming Approach 12
Naming Conventions 14
A Nickel's Worth of Objects 15
Use of Atomic Data Types 20
Important QuickDraw Clients 20
Underneath QuickDraw 21
Summary 22
2. Basic Drawing Technique and Theory 23
Raster Graphics 24
Digital Images 26
Points 26
BitMaps 28
Basic Drawing Operations 29
vii

viii

.,... Contents

Using Shapes 29
GrafVerbs 30
Pens and PenStates 33
Lines 38
Rectangles 40
Rectangle-Based Shapes 41
Polygons 53
Arcs and Wedges 55
Basic Text 57
Pictures 65
The GrafPort 69
Boundaries and Coordinate Systems 73
Visible Area 75
Clipping 76
Bottleneck Procedures 77
Summary 78
3. Drawing in Color 81
Software Components of Color 82
Graphics Toolbox Organization 82
Multi-Bit Pixels 88
Color Models 89
Indexed Color 89

Direct Color 90
Fixed Color 92
Classic Color 92
Basic Color Theory 93
RGB Color 93
Chromaticity and Primary Colors 94
RGB Color Values 97
Limits of Color Display 99
Color Picker 100
Color Picker Dialog 100
HSV Colorspace 103
CMY Colorspace 104
ColorTables 104

.,.. Contents

Graphic Devices 106

Using the Graphics Device Manager 107
Color Mapping 113
Color Gra£Ports 122
Pen Colors 124
Transfer Modes 127
Digital Images 135
PixMaps 136

PixMap Data Structure Description 137
PixMap Management Traps 140
PixMap Management Strategies 141
Creating Offscreen PixMaps 142
Color Patterns 146
Using PixPats 147

CGrafPort PixPats 147
Creating Custom PixPats 148
Moving Pixels Around 148
Introducing CopyBits() 149

Horizontal and Vertical Scaling 151
Examples of Using CopyBits() 152
Performance Considerations 157
PixMap Resolution and Patching the StdBits() Bottleneck 160
Summary 163
4. Display Control and Offscreen Drawing 165
The Need for Drawing Offscreen 165
Video Display Overview 166
Causes of Flicker 166
Basic Offscreen Drawing Procedure 168
GWorlds 170
Using GWorlds 170
More GWorld Techniques 173
GWorld Usage Summary 178
Application Display Control 178
Rules about Changing GDevice Settings 178
Using HasDepth() and SetDepth() 179

ix

x

~

Contents

The Palette Manager 180
Basic Palette Concepts 181
Important Palette Manager Traps 187
The Dark Past of the Palette Manager 190
Using Palettes 191
Palette Review 201
Specialized ColorTables 201
GDevice ColorTables 203
User Interface ColorTables 203
Summary 204
5. Applied Graphics Techniques 205
Building a Paint Application - ArtToy 205
Objectives and Goals 206
Software Tools Needed 206
Window Fundamentals 207
Graphic Foundations of Windows 208
Window Regions 209

Window Types and Presentation Considerations 213
Views 214
Focusing 218
Basic Window Event-Handling Techniques 221
Desktop Interactions 224
Introduction to Document Organization 227
Rasterizing 228
Document Rendering Techniques 229
Printing 230
Overview of the Printing Process 231
Print Data Structures 232
Important Print Traps 233
A Basic Window Object 234
Objectives 234
Class Definition 235
Public Methods 238

~

Contents

A GWorld Window Object 243
Objectives 243
Class Definition 243

Public Methods 244
Summary 247
6. Mouse-Based Graphics 249
The Two Basic Types of Mouse-Based Tools 250
Sketching 250

What All Mouse-Based Objects Have in Common 253
Drawing Tools and Abstract Differentiation 256
Regular Shapes 256
Irregular Shapes: Collected Points 270
Selection Tools 284
Summary 310
7. Image Processing with QuickDraw 311
Pixel-Processing Traps 312

Basic CopyDeepMask() and CopyMask() Functionality 314
Explicit Arguments 314
Global Arguments 317
Altering Images with CopyBits() 320
Aliasing 326

Rasterizing 328
Aliased Regions 331
Antialiased Lines 332
Antialiased Text 334

Review of Key Points 338
Depth Conversion and Dithering 338
Depth Conversion Cases 338
What Are Dithering and Error Diffusion? 341
How CopyBits() Dithers 342
Image Resizing 343
Dithered Patterns 348
Using Deep PixMaps on Classic QuickDraw Machines 349

xi

xii

.,... Contents

The BitMapToRgnO Trap 350
Device Loops 352
The DeviceLoop() Trap 353
Using DeviceLoop(): A Source Code Example 354
Summary 355
8. All About Pictures 357
Picture Analysis with the Picture Utilities 358
Taking Pictures, in Review 359
Using the Picture Utilities 361
Count of Basic QuickDraw Objects 364
Color Analysis 366
Using Deep PixMaps on Classic QuickDraw Machines 376
Summary 384
9. Compatibility and Configuration Issues 385
Hardware Configuration 386
The Well-Behaved Application 387
Software Compatibility 393
Detecting and Handling Limited System Software 394
Imposing Configuration Requirements 396
32-Bit Addressing Issues 397
A Short History 398
Addressing Video Display Memory 399
Handling 32-Bit Addressing Mode 400
Other Issues 403
Summary 404
Bibliography 405
Index 411

Foreword by Scott Knaster

Macintosh programmers are continually assaulted by all the graphics
stuff that they get to work with. QuickDraw, in its Classic, Color, and
32-bit varieties, Color Manager, Palette Manager, graphics devices, color
picking, and on and on, all have their part in making life interesting.
On the Macintosh, graphics isn't just something you do for fun - it's
at the heart of every application, and if you don't treat it that way,
your users will know.
Early Macintosh programmers knew how important graphics was to
the system. Of the original Macintosh's 64K bytes of ROM (which was
an incredibly generous amount in 1984), a full third of it (or so) was
devoted to QuickDraw. As Apple's rivals figured out that the Macintosh's graphical interface was probably a good idea after all, it was
QuickDraw that helped the Macintosh hold its technology lead for years.
In 1987, when Apple changed the Macintosh from a product to a
product line by introducing the Macintosh II with its slots and color
monitors, QuickDraw was extended to do nifty things like draw in
millions of colors and onto several monitors together at one time. (As
some of you may know, the original QuickDraw could draw in eight
colors, but a lack of output devices made that a fairly well-kept
secret.) In its transmuted form, QuickDraw remained at the heart of
the Macintosh's magic. The Macintosh graphics world was, however,
getting significantly more complex.
The next couple of years brought the release of the precocious and
awkwardly named 32-bit QuickDraw (although it had a very hip code
name, Jackson Pollock, taken from the color-splashing artist). Now
xiii

xiv

.,.. Foreword by Scott Knaster

you truly couldn't tell the QuickDraws without a road map. The
Macintosh's graphics capabilities had expanded vastly, and those who
hadn't kept up were surprised and amazed by what was available.
In an effort to help you make sense of all the graphics machinery
that Apple has poured into the Macintosh, Dave, Fred, and Konstantin
have assembled this handbook, which can act as your map into the
Macintosh's graphics highways. I don't want to stretch a metaphor
until it breaks, but they've definitely been down these roads, spending
years making pixels glow and dance before they decided to write it all
down. Keep this book with you as you explore the Macintosh's graphics and you'll have a deeper understanding of what's happening and
where you might wind up.
Scott Knaster

Macintosh Inside Out Series Editor

Acknowledgments
In the course of writing this book, we received assistance from numerous people without which this book would have been impossible.
The people at Addison-Wesley were all very pleasant and helpful. In
particular, we'd like to thank Joanne Clapp Fullagar, our tireless and
patient editor, who kept the project moving and helped us fight
through all the little details. Thanks to Carole McClendon for cheering
us on and keeping us moving forward. A kind tip of the hat to Rachel
Guichard for handling the day-to-day things. Finally, thanks to Vicki
Hochstedler for guiding this book through the production process
swiftly and gracefully.
We wish to thank Bob Royce, our illustrator, who was both patient
and tireless in creating most of the artwork in this book.
Thanks are in order for Tim Cotter, whose technical review helped set
us straight on a number of technical points in the manuscript.
We would like to thank Steve Mockensturm for the use of his rendering
of the Les Paul guitar and other odds and ends used in the color plates.
The companies Acuson, Medimage, and Apple Computer, Inc., where
we have worked at one time or another during the preparation of this
book, deserve thanks for their support of our efforts.
David Surovell thanks his close friend Cynthia Wenzel, who gave
tremendous support and encouragement throughout the entire course
of the writing effort.
Fred thanks Maggie Bayless for her love and support.

xv

xvi

.,.. Acknowledgments

David and Fred thank Patrick Leonard, who has been a fine friend
and mentor to the both of us, sharing with us much wit and wisdom
over the years.
Konstantin thanks Bruce Leak for 24-hour road service and expertise;
Chris Derossi for generating the picture of colored balls and for 24hour billiards losses; Peter Hoddie for assisting with the sample code
in Chapter 8; and David Van Brink for the picture of the squishy, slimy
buttons.
Thanks to Adam Lavine of Specular International for Infini-D which
was used to create portions of the color plates, Joe Williams and Tim
Cotter of Delta Tao for Color MacCheese which was used extensively
for creating the color plates, and Georgiann Delaney of Apple Computer for writing BitBlitz which was used to generate some of the
images on the color plates.
The manuscript for this book was created using the following software:
Borland/ Ashton-Tate/ A2 SoftWorks
FullWrite Professional
MacWrite II
Claris
FreeHand
Aldus

Introduction

When we began working on this book, we heard "I'll buy it, I'm
looking forward to reading it" from a number of other good Macintosh software engineers. We found it rather puzzling: Many (perhaps
most) of these people we consider to be exceptionally capable; some of
them are so talented it scares the daylights out of us. It's hard for us to
imagine that we could inform them about any aspect of the Macintosh,
much less the user interface engine itself!
The plain truth is that there are only a few programmers out there
who know how to hack the Macintosh's user interface in its entirety.
Many people who know a few of the Toolbox "managers" inside out
are totally naive about many of the others. This also holds true for
QuickDraw and the subset of graphics-related Toolbox managers.
Computer graphics programming is a vast discipline. To even attempt to write a complete book on the subject would be ridiculous.
The comparatively small sub-domain of Macintosh graphics programming is still large enough. When the Macintosh was introduced in
1983, QuickDraw was a nice, compact set of graphic primitives tuned
for speed in a black-and-white world. Over the years, it has become a
high-powered, but sprawling graphics environment, implemented
across an entire range of microprocessors and memory configurations,
while maintaining a flexible and consistent software interface over a
6-year period, facilitating simultaneous display across multiple monitors, and more. System 7 brings to the Macintosh another batch of new
graphics programming tools, along with significant changes to some
of the existing ones in the preceding versions of QuickDraw.
xvii

xviii

~

Introduction

Becoming comfortably conversant with such a large body of software is difficult. Not to say that it's as bad as learning to play the
bagpipes, which I've heard takes about 2 Vi years before you can play
the Scottish equivalent of "Mary Had A Little Lamb." But big it is, and
bigness is intimidating. Many of the difficulties that we've experienced are the result of an incorrect choice of methods amongst the
many available in the Macintosh graphic programming environment.
One major problem that many developers encounter when undertaking a Macintosh programming venture is a lack of access to needed
materials. Those people who work for or with firms who are "official"
Apple software developers have easy access to current programming
materials and reference information that other programmers can't
easily obtain or don't even know about. This book won't replace such
services as the Tech Notes, AppleLink, Macintosh Developer Technical
Services (Mac DTS), Apple Programmer's and Developer's Association (APDA), develop magazine, and so forth. But we have tried to
distill the more important information that we've gathered from these
sources and combine it with the reference presentation of Inside Macintosh into a concise and accurate approach to graphics programming on
the Macintosh. Treat it as a companion to,_rather than a replacement
for, those "official" materials to which you may already have access.
~

Scope and Focus
It's a struggle to keep the discussion and materials focused narrowly
enough to learn any facet of Macintosh graphic programming, and at
the same time demonstrate and encourage sensible programming tactics. Due to their computation-intensive nature, interactive graphics
systems push the underlying hardware and software systems to the
limits (and occasionally beyond); this necessitates some discussions of
the form "Well, you COULD do it that way, but.. .. " Another major
theme is that the presentation of Macintosh graphics programming
covers many areas of the Mac that don't have a "Quick" in them.

~

Of Theory and Practice
We believe that the success of this book depends on how well we keep
the average reader (that is, a sensible programmer with not much
QuickDraw experience) in mind. Except there is no "average reader."
What we do expect is that most of you have work to do, whether the
work is job-oriented or playful curiosity. Learning to drive Macintoshes

.,. Introduction

xix

graphically from the inside is hopefully a means to an end, rather than
an end unto itself. We also believe that a sensible balance of theory
talk and practical workshops are the cleanest, fastest way to understanding the Macintosh's graphic world. We know that people don't
learn to program by reading all of Inside Macintosh before writing a
single line of code, therefore we've tried to take a "show and tell"
style of presentation, augmenting technical prose with a number of
illustrations and source code examples. We hope that you find this
approach to be practical, while giving you a solid understanding of
Macintosh graphics programming. We'll try to minimize the rote memorization common to solving programming problems .

..,. Modularity
You can treat this book as a tutorial and read it front to back. However, you may prefer to skip around and read those sections first that
you find most intriguing. We expect that you will be able to do so
without a significant loss of continuity or technical comprehension.
Some chapters are a bit code-heavy, others may seem like too much
talk, and so we urge you to go back and forth between them to
synthesize the intent and discipline of QuickDraw programming. Feel
encouraged to skip around while reading this book. The technical
foundations of Macintosh graphics programming are covered in the
first four or five chapters; the remaining chapters deal with advanced
and applied topics. Tackling QuickDraw concepts individually is crucial to a thorough conceptual understanding and solid practical style.
Much of the object-oriented programming debate is concerned with
creating small yet functional modules that become the building blocks
upon which large, complex applications can be built .

..,. Source Code Disk
In the process of writing this book, we found that space limitations
would prevent us from including a lot of useful routines and other
source code examples. We have therefore compiled a source code disk
which includes the following materials:
• all source code in the book
• the complete ArtToy paintbox application source and resources,
including many familiar sketching and selection tools
• GrafPort and GDevice management routines

xx

..,. Introduction

• "useful" region generation routines
• regular polygon generation routines
• color pattern ('ppat') resizing and resource 1/0 routines
• color palette animation examples
The disk can be obtained by sending the coupon at the end of the
book and a check to the authors.

•

What's Missing
With such a large body of material to cover, it's virtually inevitable
that some elements of Macintosh graphics programming have been
omitted. There are nuances to even the most basic elements that may
have been left out; for example, we could have written a couple of
chapters on color pattern handling alone. Still other important topics
have yet to be addressed fully by the Macintosh graphics programming environment. The use of alpha channel imaging techniques and
matching color specifications to hardcopy output are examples of
such topics. Finally, there are a number of printing topics that are
related to the QuickDraw-to-PostScript translation that occurs when
generating hardcopy output from LaserWriters and other devices that
don't use QuickDraw for graphics generation and display.

•

The End of the Beginning
We hope that you will find this book to be useful and enjoyable, and
that it spends the rest of its days as a dog-eared companion next to the
Macintosh where your development is undertaken!

1

Graphics Programming
Overview

Only a programmer who is used to a world of bitmaps and single
nine-inch screens could look at a programming environment of 32-bit
colors and multiple thirteen-inch displays and think of it as wide open
and liberating. Compared to the way human beings interact with each
other, our medium is still profoundly limited. But if we understand
the medium and the ways we can exploit it, we can enhance the
quality of the information exchanged between Macintosh computers
and Macintosh users.
You'll find this book to be a source of both basic and advanced
information about Macintosh graphics programming. In it we'll try
never to stray far from practical applications of the material being
covered. But before diving right' into coding and the specifics of
Macintosh graphics programming, you should be familiar with a few
fundamentals of graphics programming. It will help your understanding of QuickDraw if you have a sense of the motivations behind
graphics programming choices and graphical user interfaces. We'll be
discussing the levels of support that operating systems give applications. By support we mean the callable tools that are embodied in the
operating system for rendering drawn objects on the screen. If an
application can ask its operating system to "rotate the surface 30
degrees in X and 110 degrees in Y," then it's getting a lot of support. If
the most the application can do is indicate which pixels are turned on
and which are turned off, it should sue the operating system for
negligence or lack of support.
In this chapter we'll describe graphics programming in general and
relate it to the Macintosh graphics environment, QuickDraw. In doing
so, we'll identify the important graphics features available to you in
the Macintosh environment.

2

.,.. Chapter 1 Graphics Programming Overview

.,.. Introduction to Graphics Environments
The range of personal computers, from the low end of the clones up
through the high end of the design workstations, have this in common: They participate in a one-on-one dialog with the user, who is
manipulating input devices. And, with very few exceptions, the output side of the dialog is presented to the user on a CRT display. How
the computer does its job of presenting what it has to say is what
gives it its personality and instills in the user a sense of either ease or
frustration.
When the job is done well, the user is brought closer to his or her
data; the operating system gets out of the way of the essential interaction, which is between the user and the information presented by the
software. It is like the ideal sought by baseball umpires who, while
being essential to the proper functioning of a baseball game, have
done their job best if the players leave the field remembering the
competition and not the umpires. Our goal as programmers and interface designers is to give users a sense of having interacted not with a
computer but with the information it contained and manipulated for
them. When the job of presenting information on a screen is done
poorly, the computer is perceived as being less of a tool and more of
an obstacle between the user and the data .

.,.. Personal Computer Graphics: A Brief Look
Backward
Every personal computer operating system has to express itself on the
screen - computers with no output are boring at best. A computer's
visible output tells the user what role the computer is playing: I'm a
word processor; I'm a video game; I'm a VCR. The problem is that
early personal computers didn't do that very well. Steve Jobs illuminated the problem when he compared computers to toasters. The role
of a toaster is singular and well defined in terms of input, output, and
control. The purposes of a personal computer, however, are numerous
and generalized - the evolution of their respective user interfaces
demonstrates this all too clearly.
Most of the familiar personal computer systems came bundled with
a family of programs that comprised their operating systems. Most
such operating systems lacked substantial visual presentation support.
Why? Perhaps because the early personal computer operating systems reflected the tasks computers had always been used for. The
emphasis was on problem-solving with numerical results; presenting

..,. Personal Computer Graphics: A Brief Look Backward

3

the results was less important than producing the results. Word processing, for example, dealt in rows and columns of text characters.
One could have argued that you didn't need graphical controls to
manipulate and present essentially alphanumeric input and output.
Graphics programming had always been the province of specialized
software used by people whose needs were essentially graphical:
model designers and image processors.
If you take these views of the nature of computing, then it might not
occur to you to build graphics support into the very operating system
itself.
Of course, price was another factor. Cheap, slow microprocessors
couldn't draw and maintain fancy graphics and still have time to do
the "important" work of "data processing."
With little graphics support built into the operating system, each
application was responsible for its own graphics support. When such
systems came out of the basement, they became anything but toys and
problems showed up quickly. When applications did their own graphics, it was tough to enforce consistency, and consistency is important
in the little things like buttons as well as in the big things like colors.
Unfortunately, these operating systems were also quite restrictive.
The user's perception of the typed, command line interface was that
the thread of control was limited to a tight call-and-response pattern
in which things happened one at a time. Commands, once initiated,
simply ran to completion or error, whichever killed them first.
To someone who grew up using Turing machines or punch cards, a
command line interface is a big step up. The success of personal
computers that used command line-oriented interfaces argues that
they were not sufficiently bad to keep people from using them. But
the move to graphical user interfaces argues that they were an evolutionary step toward the ideal user interface (whatever that turns out
to be). Users perceive a graphical interface as letting them broaden the
scope of their focus to include not just a typing prompt but the whole
screen. The graphical interface can offer more options while presenting more information than is possible with a command line interface.
From the first, the Macintosh made graphics support a big part of
the operating system. Placing QuickDraw in the Toolbox allowed the
Macintosh to take its celebrated leap in personal computing. It is a
design philosophy that has withstood the test of time.
The popularity of mice and other graphically oriented input devices
are important additions to the world of personal computers. They also
present challenges to software developers, demanding a new level of
application responsiveness and user interface creativity.

4

~

Chapter 1 Graphics Programming Overview

A graphically oriented user interface is a natural consequence of the
desire to make computers function in "human" ways, processing
short bursts of regular tasks. Many consider the Macintosh to be the
first commercially successful microcomputer to solve the dilemma of
delivering complex functionality while providing ease of operation.
The bad news is that supporting such an environment places greater
demands on the applications that run on the Macintosh. The good
news is that QuickDraw is there to help .

..., Why Is Graphics Programming Difficult?
Maybe the reason that early personal computer operating systems
lacked substantial graphics support is that graphics programming is
fairly demanding, both from a hardware and from a software standpoint. What seems simple to the uninformed can be very complex to
implement.
When an application makes a request as basic as, "Draw the string
'HELLO, WORLD' on the screen," there is a lot that is either specified
or implied. Where shall it be drawn? In what style, size, and color?
How does it get mapped into screen pixels? Where in memory are the
pixel values stored? How shall the current values of those pixels be
taken into account? If the line is too long to fit on the screen, should it
be clipped, wrapped, or shrunk?
You can see that the fewer options offered to the application by the
operating system, the simpler its job. But that avoids the problem
instead of solving it. Leaving graphics implementation up to each
application introduces the problems of inconsistency. The real solution
is to build the graphics solutions into the operating system, as was
done with QuickDraw.

..., Introduction to Macintosh Graphics
Environments
By offering services to applications, built-in graphics programming
support insulates the applications from the low-level implementation
detail necessary to effect the drawing that the applications direct. And
this insulation works both ways. By isolating the applications from
shared, systemwide resources like the graphics devices and their data
structures, the operating system protects those resources from abuse
at the hands of ignorant or careless applications. This is the essence of
a graphics environment.

IJJI>

Introduction to Macintosh Graphics Environments

5

With QuickDraw built in as part of the Toolbox, the Macintosh
provides a graphics environment to the applications that run on it. The
environment is accessible to the applications through QuickDraw calls,
but the integrity of the environment is maintained by QuickDraw.
(This state of affairs is the ideal, of course, and will never be fully
achieved in practice; whether through ignorance or malice, you can
still pollute the environment.)
With a graphics environment built into the operating system, graphics programming resembles other embedded services (like disk 1/0)
in two important respects:
• The variables that define the state of the environment are maintained by the operating system rather than by applications. Access to those variables and data structures is restricted by the
operating system. Direct manipulation of variables by the application is replaced by information requests via operating system
function calls.
• The burden of error checking must be assumed by the application. An application must be able to deal with a large number of
possible error conditions and c<;>mbinations of conditions encountered by the operating system because the operating system can
only tell the application what happened; it can't make decisions
about what to do next.
These aspects of the graphics programming environment go against
the do-it-yourself style of some personal computer programmers; these
conditions are sometimes perceived as being impediments to software
development rather than a welcome relief from certain tedious programming responsibilities. Some microcomputer applications are written as if they were intended to replace the operating system rather
than to coexist with it.

6

..,. Chapter l

Important.,..

Graphics Programming Overview

Some programmers chafe at the idea of restricted access to data
structures m· memory. If you think you have the need, you're free
to :make your'application read (and in some cases, write) QuickDraw data structures directly. But there are risks associated with
direct manipulation of system variables: They aren't guaranteed
to be where you expect to find them. If you're running under System 7.0, A/UX, or something that installs virtual memory and/ or
privileged memory access protection via PMMU protection, you
may find your hacks will stop working. Bear in mind that a little
bit of restraint - a little bit of conformity - allows many applications to coexist peacefully on a single machine. The cooperative
multitasking environment of the Process Manager (formerly
MultiFinder) is a prime example of this kind of arrangement.
The requirements of graphic presentation, with the multiplicity of
modes, control variables, and data types, becomes unwieldy without
the support of the operating system. If you didn't have the operating
system maintaining the graphics environment for you, you would
have to redefine the environment with every call, passing arguments
to describe the requested drawing in detail. For the kind of graphics
programming required of an application in support of the Macintosh
user interface, there's too much baggage to carry around through
every function call. Simply writing and debugging the applications
would get out of hand.
Drawing doesn't take place in a vacuum. Rather, the act of drawing
is a sequence of actions that takes place within the graphics programming environment. The environment defines and constrains the drawing actions, just as a pencil and piece of paper are a graphics
environment to a scribbling child. At first, maybe, the child just abuses
the environment - tearing the paper with rough strokes, drawing on
the tabletop, eventually inciting parental intervention. But with experience the child learns to keep the pencil on the paper, even attempting the occasional flat-perspective two-dimensional pastoral landscape
shown in Figure 1-1.
In some ways you're like the child learning to draw. With a little
practice and discipline, QuickDraw will become both an environment
in which you can let your application express its true nature and a
valuable tool for the user.

~

Introduction to Macintosh Graphics Environments

7

D o
Figure 1-1. Child's sketch

.,.. What's in the Toolbox?
Unlike a scribbling child, you probably approach your software problems from a generalized, abstract point of view. You shouldn't have to
reinvent the wheel to do the graphical rendering required by your
application. You can reasonably expect a graphics programming environment to provide you with certain capabilities:
• Drawn objects - You can't have graphics without drawing. An
application needs simple atomic objects, such as points, lines,
characters, and simple geometric shapes. Graphics programming
requires simple methods for drawing familiar user interface objects such as menus, controls, and windows. You need the ability
to develop application-specific graphic objects.
• Basic calculations on graphic objects - Preparing graphics for
display requires functions to calculate the area in which the graphic
will be displayed. The code to perform these calculations makes
up the bulk of graphics programming. It usually exceeds lines of
actual rendering code by a factor of 3 to l. The graphics environment must provide at least one common unit of measurement, for
example, the number of screen pixels. A number of measurement

8

~

Chapter 1 Graphics Programming Overview

units is desirable, along with routines to convert between them.
Since most computer output is of a two-dimensional nature, you
need routines that can calculate screen area in terms of basic set
theory operations such as union, intersection, and complementation. You probably also need the intermediate set theory operations as well, such as differences and exclusive or-ing.
• Full control - You need the ability to control all drawing parameters that affect the important aspects of your application. Implicit in such control is the ability to sense the environment to
detect and respond to the present device characteristics as configured by the user.
The paradigm espoused by the Macintosh designers is that you, a
card-carrying member of the Hackers, Contractors, and Occasional
Employees Union, have work to do, and they're providing you with a
toolbox. A quick inventory of the QuickDraw part of the Toolbox
includes the following basic tools: a boundaries and coordinate system answers questions like, "Where is 'right here'?" and knows what
you mean when you say, "Draw a line from right here to over there."
It provides line and curve drawing, pens and patterns, and text and
simple geometric shape drawing. There's also color and pixels, pixel
values, and display color mapping. It can transform numeric values
into colors, or colors into other colors. It even supports you when you
need to do printing and imaging on other, nonvideo devices.
Important..,,.

The Macintosh graphics environment has a lot in common with
other familiar graphics environments. After all, they're doing basically
the same job. Most of its departures from what might be thought of as
standard graphics environments are in its support of multiple, concur-

.,. Introduction to Macintosh Graphics Environments

9

rently executing applications. Most graphics environments were designed for single-user systems dedicated to graphics production. They
therefore have little need for the capabilities that most Macintosh
users and programmers take for granted - like window and desktop
management .

.,... QuickDraw
The reason that the Macintosh is a dramatic step forward in popular
computing is due largely to its user interface, which is implemented
by groups of routines that are called Toolbox managers. There is a
manager or a group of managers that implements virtually every
functional aspect of the Macintosh, from the familiar visual objects
like windows and menus to the not-so-visible NuBus devices (Slot
Manager) and AppleTalk. Depending on how you count, there are
from five to ten managers that implement Macintosh graphics capabilities. The most recognized name among Toolbox managers is
QuickDraw.
A simple description of QuickDraw is that it is the Macintosh's
graphics software engine. Its purpose is twofold: to drive the Macintosh's celebrated user interface and to provide applications with a
solid foundation of graphics functionality. Virtually every Macintosh
graphic object is either directly or indirectly drawn with a series of
QuickDraw calls. Menus, controls, pictures, and text are all drawn
with QuickDraw. There are few exceptions to this rule. (One notable
exception is LaserWriter printing, which is driven by PostScript. We'll
get to that in Chapter 3.)
QuickDraw provides Macintosh programmers with a null).ber of
important advantages over other graphics environments and hardware platforms:
• Well-defined specifications - QuickDraw is based on a published software specification - rather than a hardware design that has a number of significant implications. The most important
is that it allows for portability to future hardware with a minimum
of software disruption. In other words, running with QuickDraw
doesn't depend on its implementation, only its specification.
• Compatibility - QuickDraw has proven to be a fairly stable
specification, endowing applications with the ability to stand the
test of time without substantial modification to the underlying
software architecture. While the Macintosh has evolved substantially

1O

~

Chapter 1 Graphics Programming Overview

from the first 128K version, QuickDraw has continued to support
those applications that were designed to use it in the old days
while it has evolved to provide substantial new features.
• Hardware independence - QuickDraw encourages applications
. to take advantage of hardware improvements while insulating
them from the idiosyncrasies of display devices and the strange
combinations of devices that users often put together.
• Full-featured graphics capability - Besides supporting ''basic"
graphic operations, QuickDraw provides a number of tools to
perform complex graphic analysis and manipulation.
• Optimized for performance - You might think that this assertion
contradicts the compatibility arguments, but it doesn't. Although
QuickDraw was designed to take advantage of Motorola's 68000
family of CPUs (the architecture of the 68000 family is extremely well
suited to graphics processing), it would be difficult if not impossible to pinpoint QuickDraw design concessions to the processor.
• Open-ended design for extensibility - QuickDraw was designed
to be extensible. The designers knew that they couldn't foresee all
of the directions in which personal computing technology might
go, so they designed QuickDraw to do its job without precluding
future enhancements. So far, they've been rewarded with a robust, vital piece of software.
• Customization - QuickDraw, like many aspects of the Macintosh operating system, contains hooks on which an application
can hang its own special-purpose code for its own way of doing
things. At the points where these customized extensions can be
installed, QuickDraw looks to see if there is a special way of
doing something before proceeding to do it the QuickDraw way.
~

Doing It Yourself: The Path Not Taken
Some programmers prefer to adapt new software environments to
their own style of programming, bringing with them command scripts,
utility function libraries, and other development tools. That's understandable. People like to do things in familiar ways. There can be
anxiety attached to leaving an environment in which you feel comfortable and productive to go to a new one where you have to learn new
ways of doing things. When you first start programming the Macintosh, you may be tempted to develop and use your own graphic
function library instead of QuickDraw and the related managers.
Particularly if you're porting an existing program from another envi-

IJl. Introduction to Macintosh Graphics Environments

11

ronment to the Mac, you might opt for a do-it-yourself approach. Do
yourself a favor: don't. The effort required to adapt to QuickDraw will
be repaid in robustness.
There are some arguments against doing things with QuickDraw,
but we think that they're generally either overstated or rooted in
misconceptions:
• "QuickDraw is hard to transport to other environments like X
Windows, Motif, OPEN LOOK, SunView, Presentation Manager,
and so forth."
If you have to port, then you've probably planned on separating
the user interface and the operating system-dependent code anyway. To begin with, user interface support is one of the least
transportable kinds of software. The organization of your software, rather than the Macintosh's graphic architecture, is more
likely to determine the difficulty of your port. Porting is usually a
pain anyway, and QuickDraw doesn't make it worse. (Remember
that most laser printers for the Macintosh render their graphics in
a PostScript environment.)
• "Apple owns QuickDraw and I'd rather have my own graphics
package, with 100 percent of the source code."
Having access to the source code for your graphics environment
may give you a warm feeling, but is it really that important? The
difficulty in staying compatible with future releases of Macintosh
software would cost you time and resources that could be spent
more profitably on your applications.
• "What if Apple changes QuickDraw? I can't afford to be fixing my
software every time a new System software release comes out."
This is the flip side of the preceding complaint. The problem of
future compatibility can never be eliminated, only reduced. The
ongoing enhancements and improvements made to System software, along with the addition of new models to the Macintosh
line, make the task of compatibility even greater. Generally speaking, Apple's track record at minimizing compatibility problems
has been good. It understands the panic that ensues when new
software and hardware releases break existing software applications and third-party hardware. Having developers, customers,
and support staff in revolt isn't in anyone's interests, and Apple
makes substantial efforts to provide developers with the tools to
avoid such difficulties. You're better off with QuickDraw than
without it.

12

~

Chapter 1 Graphics Programming Overview

• "QuickDraw isn't fast enough. It won't perform up to my applications' requirements unless I get faster hardware."
If you really need to develop custom image-processing algorithms, there's no need to pitch QuickDraw entirely. There are
substantial well-defined facilities for direct access to image
memory. You can find examples in some of the mathematics and
statistical software packages currently running on the Macintosh
to appreciate QuickDraw' s solid high-octane performance. But if
you need even greater performance, you answered your own
question: Buy some hardware. Besides, that's what hardware's
for. If you're doing rocket science, you're going to have to buy
some rocket technology! If your application is useful and powerful, your customers may find that enough of an inducement to
make the hardware investment.
Any of these objections can be debated at length. The bottom line is
that QuickDraw performs acceptably well by most accounts. Do yourself and your users a favor and leave the basics to the graphics
Toolbox. The odds of building a better mousetrap by yourself, and
having it work against the mouse yet to be born, are against you.
~

Defining a Practical Programming
Approach
Writing code can be fun. If you want to keep it interesting as well as
productive, you'd be well advised to set and follow some sort of
coding guidelines, whether they're your own or adopted, formal or
informal.
There are few, if any, software systems that provide powerful functionality while simultaneously insulating programmers and their applications from abusing that functionality. QuickDraw is no exception:
It's surprisingly easy to pursue ill-chosen designs that will ultimately
fail to provide reliable application performance. These pitfalls can be
avoided, however. The need for solid, systematic development techniques is acute when writing graphics-intensive software. Things are
tough enough without the added burden of sloppy code or incomprehensible formatting. We're going to skip an in-depth discussion of our
methodologies, but the following is a list of the style elements that we
think promote successful programming. Consider them guidelines
rather than laws.

~

Defining a Practical Programming Approach

13

• Design clearly, design simply - Don't write tricky code when
simple will do. Some programmers began optimizing their routines before successfully executing for the first time. First make it
run, then make it run fast.
• Use comments - Do it for yourself, if for nobody else. Programmers often treat their own software as though it were a personalized work of art, never thinking for a moment that someone else
will ever need to understand it at the source code level. But even
if nobody were to ever work on your source files, you can usually
save yourself a hassle by writing reminders to yourself in comments. Write down your thoughts about questionable code, keep
revision histories, remind yourself about problems discovered at
4 A.M. Help the others who may have to read your code - one of
them may be you.
• Check error conditions - If a routine can fail, then check the
results after calling it. The most common reason many Macintosh
Toolbox routines fail to perform under certain circumstances is a
shortage of available memory. If you don't already do it, force
yourself to check error codes - you'll get used to it.
• Keep routines small - Small routines have a number of advantages over large ones: They are easier to read, easier to print, and
easier to understand and debug. They are also easier to rewrite, if
necessary. Small routines also facilitate optimal hardware register
utilization.
• Be stylistically consistent - Consistency makes it easier to make
global changes. It enhances readability and understanding.
• Use NULL/NIL - Indicate an absence of valid data in your
variables by assigning them invalid values (use -1 if NULL is a
valid value). This applies to initialized or deallocated handles and
pointers. Doing this helps your application to manage these allocations properly.
• Track file 1/0 reference tokens very carefully - If you open a
file, don't forget to close it. Avoid closing files that you didn't
open and really avoid closing files that aren't open. Use invalid
sentinel values (-1, 0) for initialized or otherwise invalid file and
device reference numbers.
• Keep global variable references to a minimum - Excessive
reliance on global variables causes problems in direct proportion
to the number of global variables allocated.

14

..,. Chapter 1 Graphics Programming Overview

• Plan for debugging- If the task is complex, implement diagnostic routines before you debug. Once debugging code is in place,
consider making it conditionally compiled, rather than just removing it. Plan for enough time to test and debug.
• Understand and follow Apple's software development guidelines - We know that other people's guidelines are annoying. No
one likes to be told what to do, or how to do it, and Mac programmers are no exception. Still, when it comes to software reliability,
an ounce of prevention is worth a ton of cure, and Apple's guidelines are usually prescriptions for the right kind of prevention.
You may not always like the guidelines, and you can't always
comply with them, but at least try to understand them.
lill- Naming Conventions

Gather any number of programmers together to discuss naming conventions and you're likely to start a war. While you don't have to fight
about it, you should take one side or another: either use someone
else's naming conventions or make up your own. And then follow
them. Expending the effort to choose meaningful names for routines,
variables, constants, and other programming language artifacts is an
important investment in lucid, maintainable software. Don't sell your
software short. The huge number of objects and operations available
to Macintosh programmers makes the use of naming conventions
even more important. Here are some ways to make names work for
you instead of against you:
• Avoid cryptic symbol names - Some people don't like to use
vowels in names. Some people take pity on their linkers and
assemblers, thinking that their tools are less likely to get overworked and act up if names are kept short. But that's what these
tools are built for - so six months later you won't have to
wonder if "cPoau" means "pixel count of absolute underflow" or
is a type of tropical bird.
• Get similar- Name similar things with similar names.
/*good* I
long carLength, truckLength;
long carLength, truckHSize;
/*less good* I
When naming local variables of a common type and purpose, use
the same names. If you like to use single letters for indexing
variables, don't use twenty-six different letters for twenty-six

.,.. Defining a Practical Programming Approach

15

indexing variables. It's easier to cut, copy, and paste code if
you've used the same variable name in similar contexts.
• Use common prefixes and suffixes for related routines - You'll
see this trend show up in a number of Toolbox managers.
Color QuickDraw PixMap handling routines
NewPixMap(), DisposePixMap(), CopyPixMap()
Memory Manager Handle handling routines
HLock(), HUnlock(), HPurge(), SetHState()
Oh well, three out of four ain't bad.
• Pick names that describe - The days of linkers restricted to
seven significant leading characters have passed us by, at least in
the Macintosh world.
• Use case conventions - Pascal programmers, take note: Use
uppercase and lowercase characters differently. The MacApp naming conventions make good use of case and are pretty good all
around, even if you're a C/C++ programmer.
• Use your tools - Most development systems are bundled with a
number of useful analytical tools, such as symbolic debuggers,
breakpoint debuggers, and execution profilers. Learn to use them
skillfully and often.
Again, these are only guidelines. Any one of them can be the proverbial ounce of prevention that wards off tons of debugging misery.
~

A Nickel's Worth of Objects
Object-oriented programming software (OOPS) is all the rage these
days. It's on everyone's lips and is making substantial inroads in the
software tools market. Object-oriented techniques are particularly useful in solving graphics programming problems; the parallels between
object and graphics hierarchies reinforce and resonate with each other.
A few of the source code examples in this book will be in an objectoriented format. The desire for useful, reusable, and flexible software
is behind much of its popularity. At the time of this writing, nearly
every major Macintosh development system has some OOPS support,
either in the form of syntactical extensions such as C++ and Object
Pascal, or in the form of software libraries, such as MacApp and the
Think Class Libraries. As far as bandwagons go, OOPS is a pretty
good one to jump on, and it will probably take us a long way. At some

16

..,.. Chapter 1 Graphics Programming Overview

point, you will have to make the leap; how quickly is up to you. If you
have never been exposed to OOPS, you may be surprised at how easy
it is to employ useful object-oriented techniques. As with any coding
technique, clarity is a matter of style: The code can vary in complexity
from simple to the utterly incomprehensible.
One of the practical aspects of OOPS architecture is the marriage of
composite data structures (Pascal Records or C structs) with the routines that use them. The routines that are declared within an object are
called methods, and the corresponding fields of the object's data structure are called instance variables.
The following two sections each contain two examples that compare
OOPS techniques with corresponding procedural techniques. Notice
the similarities between them. The most important one to notice is
that the object doesn't have to pass a reference to its data structure
because its instance variables are referenced within each method as
though they were local variables.
Declarations: Data Structures Versus Objects

Listings 1-1 and 1-2 reveal a quick comparison of procedural versus
object-oriented programming styles in C:
Listing 1-1. Procedural structure declaration
/* data structure */
typedef struct
{

long
long
long
long
Handle
SignedByte

twinkle;
realSize;
obj Size;
objCount;
buffData;
buffHState;

Bag;
/* routines that utilize the data structure */
I* by accessing and modifying the data structure's fields */

void Bag_Init(
Bag* theBaginfo ) ;
Boolean Bag_Valid(
Bag* theBaginfo ) ;

..,. Defining a Practical Programming Approach

OSErr Bag_Update(
Bag* theBaginfo ) ;
Handle Bag_Freeze(
Bag* theBaginfo ) ;
OSErr Bag_Thaw(
Bag* theBaginfo,
Handle *theHdl );
void Bag_Print(
Bag* theBaginfo ) ;
void Bag_Dispos(
Bag* theBaginfo ) ;

Listing 1-2. Object declaration
class Bag
{

/* field variables */
twinkle;
long
realSize;
long
obj Size;
long
long
objCount;
buffData;
Handle
SignedByte buf fHState;
/* methods: routines embedded in the data structure */
void Init( void ) ;
Boolean Valid( void);
OSErr Update( void);
Handle Freeze( void);
OSErr Thaw(
Handle *theHdl );
void Print ( void ) ;
void Dispos( void);
};

17

18

..,. Chapter 1 Graphics Programming Overview

With respect to the intent of developmental guidelines, objects and
procedural libraries drink from the same well: An object definition
should look like a well-designed library of routines that are dedicated
to supporting a data structure. That idea is nothing new. What's
interesting is that OOPS enforces and tightens the coupling of the
code and the data. The differences between calling procedurally based
routines and object-based methods is minor. You just have get used to
seeing subroutine calling syntax attached to the end of a data structure reference.
Usage: Data Structures Versus Objects

The preceding section pointed out that defining objects is not much
different from declaring data structures and procedural routines. Using
objects is a similarly easy transition to make. Listing 1-3 shows an
example of using the data structures in Listings 1-1 and 1-2 and a set of
specialized routines. Listing 1-4 shows an equivalent object-oriented
implementation.
Listing 1-3. Using the procedural data structure
void SomeRoutine( void )
{

Bag
OSErr

aBag;
/* the data structure itself */
errStat; /* error status variable */

/* initialize the data structure */
Bag_Init( &aBag );
/* check if the data structure is uoK" *I
if (Bag_Valid( &aBag ))
{

/* do something to the Bag */
errStat = Bag_Update( &aBag );
/* if it worked, then print it out */
if (errStat == noErr)
Bag_Print( &aBag );

/* cleanup: dispose of any allocated handles */
Bag_Dispos( &aBag );

~

Defining a Practical Programming Approach

Listing 1-4. Using an object
void SomeRou tine( vo id )
Bag
OSErr

*aBag;
errStat ;

/* a pointer to an object * /
/* error status var i able */

/* allocate memory for t h e object * /
/ * Pascal and C objec t versions */
aBag = new( Bag ) ;
/ * C++ version : invoke the constructor * /
aBag : : Bag ;
/ * initialize the object * /
aBag->Init() ;
/ * check if the object is "OK " * /
if (aBag->Init())
/ * do something to the Bag * /
errStat = aBag - >Update() ;
/ * i f it worked , then print it out */
if (errStat == noErr)
aBag->Print() ;

/ * cleanup : dispose of any allocated handles * /
/* Pascal and C object versions * /
delete ( aBag ) ;
/ * C++ version: invoke the destructor */
-aBag ;

Important.,.

If these object examples are really foreign to you, you might
want to brush up on elementary OOPS theory and technique. See
the Bibliography for a list of some helpful reference materials.
A:ltl:\ough thi book isn't steeped in OOPS :;yntax and examples,
a number of examples are presented in this form.at.

19

20

..,. Chapter· 1 Graphics Programming Overview

Object-oriented design isn't a panacea for all past and present software development headaches, but its emphasis on additive design
techniques and hierarchical organization make it a natural and welcome addition to the graphics programmer's set of tools .

.,.. Use of Atomic Data Types
In the interest of consistency with the largest possible number of
popular compilers, the standard data types shown in Table 1-1 will be
used in this book.
Table 1-1. Standard data types

~

Generic type

Size in bits

c

Pascal

integer
long integer
short fixed point
long fixed point
short floating point
long floating point

16
32
16
32
32

short
long
SmallFract
Fixed
float
Extended

Integer
Longint
SmallFract
Fixed
Real
Extended

80/96

Important QuickDraw Clients
In addition to QuickDraw, there are other areas of the Toolbox that are
essential to programming a graphical user interface but aren't part of
QuickDraw proper. In practice, every other Toolbox manager that has
a graphics component uses QuickDraw. The Toolbox managers listed
below rely on QuickDraw to implement many of their important
features:
• Window Manager - The visible components of windows are
built from basic QuickDraw data structures.
• Control Manager - This manager handles the display and tracking of the standard Macintosh controls: buttons, check boxes,
radio buttons, and scrollbars. It also provides mechanisms for
using custom controls. Controls are handled by 'CDEF's (Control
Definition procedures), which are resource-based routines that
typically call a small number of simple QuickDraw traps to draw
controls in a number of different states: highlighted, normal,
disabled, and so on.

~

Underneath QuickDraw

21

• TextEdit - This manager implements display and management
of small pieces of formatted multi-typeface text - typically less
than a few Kilobytes worth of text at a time. TextEdit isn't suitable
for industrial-strength text editing. Its primary role is to handle
small amounts of text in dialog windows. TextEdit is also capable
of handling text in languages other than English, which can make
up for its lack of horsepower.
• Dialog Manager - This manager is built on the three managers
just described to present dialog boxes and handle the events
pertaining to them .

..,. Underneath QuickDraw
Just as QuickDraw supports various higher-level managers, it is supported by other Toolbox managers. The following managers support
some of QuickDraw's functionality at the lower levels. A nominal
understanding of these dependencies can help when undertaking
Macintosh programming.
• Memory Manager - A number of QuickDraw data structures
contain handles and pointers or are themselves handle- or pointerbased. The Graphics Toolbox relies on Memory Manager routines
to create, resize, and dispose of handle-based data structures such
as Regions, Polygons, and many color-related data types.
• Resource Manager - Some graphics data structures can also be
created and initialized from resources. The rules regarding the
usage and maintenance of resources are applicable to these data
structures. All standard user interface objects and their associated
color information data types are usually loaded from resources.
The following managers are involved with the generation and display of text:
• Font Manager - This manager implements the lower-level management of typeface information, including measurements for
character and style modifications.
• Print Manager - This manager dynamically translates the
QuickDraw commands issued by an application into those that
can be understood by printers and other hardcopy output devices. The most familiar example of this translation mechanism is
the LaserWriter's QuickDraw-to-PostScript conversion. The Print

22

~

Chapter 1 Graphics Programming Overview

Manager is also responsible for presenting the familiar Print and
Page Setup dialogs through the lower-level print drivers.
• International Utilities - The Macintosh is quite successful in
many countries outside the United States, in large part because of
its ability to display, format, and manage text in languages other
than English. The International Utilities package provides most of
these capabilities, along with English text formatting for dates,
times, and monetary amounts. It won't make writing a Japanese
word processor easy, but it'll help. TextEdit and other text-based
services call the International Utilities package directly.

..,.. Summary
The Macintosh provides a powerful and flexible graphics environment based on the Toolbox manager called QuickDraw. QuickDraw
gives applications developers powerful and flexible means with which
to render graphics both on and off the screen. These capabilities
require careful programming and a fairly thorough understanding of
computational graphics concepts. Ultimately, the software developer's
willingness to address the issue through thoughtful software design
and sensible organization will be the greatest factor in determining
any software application's utility and success. Many of the techniques
referred to in this chapter were generally stated and could be applied to
development strategies for hardware platforms other than the Macintosh.
The strengths and weaknesses of the Macintosh graphics environment were also presented in general terms. In particular, the chapter
emphasized the graphics environment's functional capabilities and
durability of design.
This chapter also presented a case for object-oriented design. The
authors like the compact representation of object syntax. Finally, some
of the lower-level managers were described.

2

Basic Drawing Technique
and Theory

This chapter presents QuickDraw's basic drawing and calculation
functionality. You may already be familiar with QuickDraw's basic
shape drawing and calculation support. If so, you may want to skim
this chapter. For those readers who are new to Macintosh programming, it's essential that you read this chapter, along with the QuickDraw and Window Manager chapters of Inside Macintosh, Volume I.
QuickDraw is expansive: There are nearly a hundred QuickDrawspecific data structures and a few hundred Toolbox routines. Large
software environments can be difficult and daunting. QuickDraw is
less hostile than most, but it's a vast body of functionality, implementing a large family of basic graphic constructs. We begin by introducing
the basics of digitized images. The middle portion of the chapter
discusses shape drawing, and we conclude with the integration of
QuickDraw concepts into a single graphics environment.
(Note that because of the complexity of color graphics programming, color issues are temporarily set aside; for now, consider drawing to be in black-and-white. We discuss color support in the next
chapter, and we will build on the basic functionality presented in this
chapter.)

23

24

Iii>-

Chapter 2

I By the Way .., I

lllll-

Basic Drawing Technique and Theory

Throughout the course of this book, we use fue term trap ~hen
referring to executable code in the T-oolbox and the term routine
when referring to executable code outside the Toolbox. The au,tho rs prefer these terms because they are relatively languageindepe,ndent. You may use other terms for "routine," such as
"procedure" or "function" if you're a Pascalite, or "subroutine"
if you're from a Fortran or Basic school of programming. In any
case, we hope that our choice of terminolog}'ris at least comprehensible, if not appreciatea.

Raster Graphics
The world of computer graphics includes a variety of different graphic
output devices. There are line printers, laser printers, plotters, storage
tubes, and raster-scan displays, to name the most familiar ones. At the
high levels of interacting with QuickDraw, you're describing shapes
and patterns that are fairly independent of the device on which they're
drawn. But at the next level down, the level at which QuickDraw is
creating and storing the results of drawing operations, QuickDraw
reflects the display device for which it was designed: the raster-scan CRT.
A Macintosh display monitor and a TV set are both raster-scan
devices. They create an image by shooting an electron beam (or beams)
at the excitable phosphor coating on the face of the screen. The beam
is aimed magnetically and is swept across a horizontal line from one side
of the screen to the other, and then another horizontal line is scanned
just below the first. Line after line is drawn until the screen is filled
from top to bottom. As the electron beam is scanned across a horizontal line, it is modulated to create adjacent spots where the phosphor is
excited to different intensities. The result is a two-dimensional matrix
of differently illuminated spots that the eye blends together as a single
image. Figure 2-1 illustrates the composition' of a raster-scan image.
Raster-scan displays come in a lot of different sizes. For example, a
thirteen-inch Apple RGB monitor typically displays 480 lines of 640
dots each; the Classic Macintosh's nine-inch screen has 342 lines of
512 dots. For reasons described later, a color monitor has not one but
three independent electron guns: one each for red, green, and blue
spots. Various colors are created on the screen by mixing the intensities of red, green, and blue for a given spot on the screen.

~

Raster Graphics

25

A single pixel

Figure 2- 1. Display monitor, with inset of magnified pixels

The Macintosh's memory is, of course, digital in nature, while a
raster-scan display is an analog device. A picture stored in its digital
form in memory is sent to special electronic circuitry that creates from
it an analog signal (video) for the monitor. The monitor decodes the
video signal and uses it to direct the modulation of the sweeping
electron beams.

26

..,.. Chapter 2

~

Basic Drawing Technique and Theory

Digital Images
The picture on a raster-scan CRT is composed of a two-dimensional
matrix of spots called pixels (short for picture element), which are the
smallest unit of a screen image. Pictures can be stored in Macintosh
memory as a sequential stream of pixels, each of which describes one
point in the picture.

~

Points
A point is the atomic unit of graphic drawing and calculations. Locations on a graphics coordinate plane are referenced by variables of
type Point, a data structure that is composed of two integers that
indicate a horizontal and a vertical coordinate. Points are most often
used in one of two ways:
• to define. the boundaries of shapes. Examples of shape definition
are the endpoints of a line, the vertex points of a triangle, or the
control points of a curved line segment.
• to hold the results of calculations involving the mouse location,
which has a point coordinate at any given instant. The current
mouse position can be obtained by calling the GetMouse() trap,
which has the following interface:
void GetMouse(
Point local MousePos);

When handling mouse-based events, the mouse coordinate is
returned in the EventRecord' s where field, which is also of type
Point.
Measuring with Points and Pixels

A Point is the address of a single indivisible unit of drawing, not a
drawing unit itself. Points have no inherent size, but they are used to
measure distances and define location (see Figure 2-2) in the same
way that mile markers on the highway indicate distance and location.

""

Raster Graphics

27

(0, O)

The point (3, 2)
has no dimension.

The pixel at (3, 2)
hangs down and
to the right.

Figure 2-2. The difference between a point and a pixel
Resolution
The translation from a point to an actual pixel is known as the
resolution. When referring to the screen itself, a point is the location of
the upper-left corner of a single pixel. The resolution of the typical
Macintosh monitor is 72 pixels per inch. Hardcopy devices (printers,
scanners, film recorders, and the like) usually have a much greater
resolution: Standard LaserWriter resolution is 300 dots per inch (dpi),
and many other printers have resolutions of 600 dpi or greater.
Important IJI>

It's imp rtant to understand that there is no inherent resolution of
the QuickDraw coordinate plane; resolution is arbitrary,.and it is
only important when the resy.lts ol drawing operations are transferred to a physical device, such as a screen or printer.

28

IJlo.

Chapter 2

~

Basic Drawing Technique and Theory

BitMaps
In order to represent the structure of monochrome image memory,
QuickDraw provides the BitMap data structure, as shown in Listing 2-1.
Listing 2-1. BitMap data structure
typedef struct
{

Ptr
short
Rect

baseAddr;
rowBytes;
bounds;

BitMap;

The BitMap allows QuickDraw to express unstructured memory in a
rectangular format that parallels the raster-scan orientation of video
displays. The role of the BitMap' s fields is as follows:

• baseAddr - This is simply a pointer to some memory allocation,
usually the result of a NewPtr() call.
• rowBytes -This field holds the number of bytes in a single row
of pixel values. Since each monochrome pixel requires a single bit
(0 for white, 1 for black), the value of rowBytes is the number of
pixels in a row, rounded up to the nearest multiple of 16 and then
divided by 8. For example, a BitMap with 53 pixels per row
would have its row Bytes value calculated in the following manner:
53 pixels per row

= 64 (nearest multiple of 16)
= 64 I 8 bits per byte
= 8 bytes per row

The additional 11 bits at the end of each row are unused and
therefore wasted.
• bounds - This field is a Rect variable, a type used to express a
rectangle that describes the BitMap' s coordinate system. Rects are
discussed at length later in this chapter.
BitMaps are very important to QuickDraw; the results of drawing
operations ultimately end up in a BitMap, or else those results cannot
be displayed. For almost all QuickDraw operations, the drawing destination BitMap is determined by QuickDraw and isn't directly specified. We'll see how this is determined later in this chapter.

..,.

Important~

Using Shapes

29

Qµ. black-and-white Macintoshes, the screen is described by, a
.JJitMap whose bounds value is equal to the screen diifjbions itt
pixels and a baseAddr value that points to the actual screen imi~e

memory.

Basic Drawing Operations
When we think about drawing, we often consider the limitations of
pen and pencil to be an integral part of drawing itself. But that is
really only semantic baggage: One could just as easily say that a
painter "draws" with a brush, although most people say that a painter
"paints." When people draw, they draw with lines and dots, and build
more complex shapes from collections of lines and dots. Computers
typically draw complete shapes all at once .

...,. Using Shapes
As Figure 2-3 illustrates, simple computer-generated shapes have three
important attributes:
• Filling pattern - The digital-world equivalent of texture.
• Border or perimeter - The shape's visual skeleton, often drawn
with a different pattern than the filling.
• Control points - The shape's mathematical skeleton. Control
points are coordinate values used to define specific instances of a
given shape. These can be a shape's corner points for shapes such
as polygons, or points situated near the shape, such as the foci of
conic curves or the defining points of complex spline curves.
Filling pattern
Border

Figure 2-3. Attributes of computer-generated shapes

30

~

Chapter 2 Basic Drawing Technique and Theory

Figure 2-4 shows examples of the basic QuickDraw shapes: Rectangles, Round Rectangles, Ovals, Arcs (Wedges), Polygons, and Regions. Lines and text are exceptional shapes, included here only because
QuickDraw can draw them as well as the others.

I \
Oval

Re ct

Polygon

Round Hect

~
Region

Line

~
Arc

Figure 2-4. Basic QuickDraw shapes

Recognize that many other shapes can be derived from these basic
ones; for example, circles and squares are special cases of ovals and
rectangles, hexagons and triangles are simply types of polygons.
~

GraNerbs
The standard QuickDraw shape-drawing commands are known as
GrafVerbs. The five QuickDraw GrafVerbs are Frame, Fill, Paint, Invert, and Erase. These are implemented for all six basic QuickDraw
shape types:
• Frame - Draws the outline of a shape, inside of the points that
define the shape. The frame is drawn in the current pen pattern.
• Paint - Fills in a shape, using the current fill pattern.
• Fill - The same as Paint except that you specify explicitly the
filling pattern.
• Invert - Changes all pixel values within a shape to their complements. Black pixels become white and vice versa.
• Erase - Fills the shape with the current background color and
pattern, usually solid white.

liJJ>

Using Shapes

31

The names of QuickDraw drawing traps are usually formed by
concatenating a GraNerb with a graphic object name, for example
FillRect. These graphic verbs are very much like their linguistic verb
counterparts in that they refer to actions without referring to the
objects that they operate on: "fill" means fill, whether the object is a
rectangle or a gas tank. Figure 2-5 shows the visual effects of GraNerbs.
The actions of a given GraNerb depend on two factors:
• the state of the graphics environment variables that define the
pen and color information
• the pixel values in the area where the drawing operation is to take
place
These factors are discussed later in this chapter.
Background pattern
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
}~}("·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.· ... ·.··"~((

Current pen pattern

____Jk--

"myPat"

Initial rectangl~
(filled with white)

........................
·························
........................
·························
·························
.........................
························
........................
........................
·························
........................
·························
.........................
........................

111111111111111111111111:111111111:11111111:111

EraseRect (myRect)

}}j

}{~~

~{}

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::;::::::::

.........................
...........................
.......................
.........................
.......................
::::::::::-:-:·:·:-:-:-:-:·:·:·:-:·:-:-:::::::::
........................

.·.·.·.·.·•················.·.·.·.·

:........................
i....................
il l l lillllilf
l l l l f l~l~\..............
....................
.....
..................
....................
.....
..................

.....
...
..... ..................
.........................
.......................
·.·.·.·.·.·.·..............
.........................
........................
FrameRect (myRect)

.........................
························
........................
.........................
:::::::::~:·:·:·:·:·=·=·=:::::::::

:::::::::~·······::::::::::

:::::::::~········=::::::::

lnvertRect (myRect)

.........................
.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.-.·.·.·.·.-.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·
. ...................... ..
:::::::::~~·~:~·:·:~···:·:·:·:·:·:·:···:···:·:::::::::
.....
. ...
·····~····
:::::::::.
:::::::::
....
. .........
..........
.....
......
.... ....
....
.....
.....
.....
.....
.
.... ...
....
.....
.
.....
.....
.....
.

:~:~:~:~:~:8:8:8:8:8:8:8::~:~:~:~:

: :=: : : ·.·:·.·:·.·:~: : =:=•

FillRect (myRect, myPat)

PaintRect (myRect)

~~~~~~~~~tttttttt:ll~~~~~~~

· · · · •?"VVV'VVVV · · · · ·

:·:·:·:·:·:·:·:·:·:·:·:·:·:·:·:·:·:·:·:·:·:·:·:·:

Figure 2-5. Results of GraNerb operations on a rectangle

32

~

Chapter 2

Basic Drawing Technique and Theory

In many cases, QuickDraw provides a trap to perform a single
operation on a given shape. Much of this drawing functionality can be
expressed simply as a table of shapes and shape operations, as shown
in Figure 2-6.

"°

~~ o~

o~ ~a ;?o

t-· ~ a

~

~J'

~J'

O'~ ~ ~

06> 6>"t ~/ -i," <9"t ;?~ o~

"' • • • • • •
"' • • • • • •

Frame

=
=

Fill

• • • • • • •
"' • • • • • •
Invert
"' • • • • • •
And-Intersect
• •
•
Or-Union
•
•
i:'
XOr
•
.c:
Difference
•
- PointlnShape •
en
•
lsEmptyShape
•
•
=
Inset
•
•
JS E
en o
Offset
•
• •
I(Pts) ->shape
•
"' "'
Small Size • • • • •
·.;;
Fixed Length • • • • •
ti
Large Size
...
• •
.c:
Variable Length
• •
= OK in Pictures • • • • • • •
::::>
OK in Regions • • •
• • •
OK in Polygons •
"[i

...
Q
Ill

Paint

Erase

Cl
GI
GI

-

Cl

·-

Ill

D..

Ill

u

ca "i::

-Ill

Q

GI
Ill

Ill

u

GI

Ill
Ill

Legend

Directly With 1Call
• Done
Done Indirectly
A

blank

Difficult or Impossible

Figure 2-6. QuickDraw shapes and operations

..,.. Using Shapes

~

33

Pens and PenStates
When QuickDraw shapes are drawn, there are five basic parameters
that determine the shape's appearance. These are collectively referred
to as the pen or PenState. The PenState contains the following information:
• Visibility - Loosely put, visibility indicates whether the pen is
actually touching the digital "paper." The pen can be hidden, in
which case all line-drawing and framing operations will not produce visible results. The visibility is maintained as an integer
whose initial value is zero; the HidePen() trap increments the
"level" value, whereas the ShowPen() trap decrements it. Zero or
negative values indicate a visible pen. A zero or negative number
pen size has the same effect as hiding the pen; however this
doesn't affect the pen level value.
• Location - The pen location affects all line-drawing operations.
Calling LineTo() with integer values "x" and "y" draws a line
from the current pen location to (x, y) and sets the new pen
location at (x, y). Lines can also be drawn relative to the current
pen position: Calling Line() with the same arguments will draw a
line from the current position to a point x pixels to the right and y
pixels down.
• Size - The pen shape is rectangular, having a horizontal and
vertical size. The PenSize() trap sets both the horizontal and
vertical dimensions. Figure 2-7 shows the effects of PenSize()
calls on the results of FrameRect().

DODD

PenSize (1, 1)

PenSize (2, 2)

PenSize (4, 1)

PenSize (1, 4)

Figure 2-7. Pen sizes

The pen size affects all line-drawing and framing operations. If
either pen size dimension is zero or negative, the pen will behave
as though it's hidden, and will not draw during GraNerb and
line-drawing traps.

34

.,... Chapter 2

Basic Drawing Technique and Theory

• Pattern - When shapes and lines are drawn, they aren't necessarily filled in solid. The digital "texture" or "filling" is called a pattern.
A pattern is an 8-by-8 array of bits, with each bit designating a
pixel: a bit, if set, means black; if clear, it means white. Listing 2-2
shows the Pattern data structure.

Listing 2-2. Pattern data structure
typedef char[B ] Pattern ;

The Pattern data structure holds the pattern's pixel values as they
occur from left to right and top to bottom. The upper-left pixel
value is stored in the most significant bit of the Pattern's first
byte; the last pixel value is stored in the least significant bit of the
Pattern's last byte.
Important~

Figure 2-8 shows the bitwise nature of some patterns (top row),
compared to what they appear to be at a normal viewing distance
(bottom row).
20 % Gray

White

lllllllllll ll lllllllllllllllllllllll
Figure 2-8. Close-up of patterns

Checkerboard

~

Using Shapes

35

The pattern most commonly used is a solid black pattern, where
every bit in the pattern is set. Shapes and lines drawn in a black
pattern change every pixel underneath. The opposite of a solid
black pattern is white, naturally. Patterns are often used in place
of color to express differences between visual objects, especially
when color isn't available.
Patterns are usually accessed from resources. The System file
contains an array of patterns in resource 'PAT#' 0. These patterns
can be inspected with a resource editor such as ResEdit or accessed from an application by calling the GetlndPattem() trap.
Additionally, there are five standard patterns that are available to
applications as named QuickDraw global variables: black, white,
ltGray, gray, and dkGray.
• Transfer mode - The pen transfer mode determines the way the
"ink" is absorbed by the "paper" being written on. When a drawing operation is performed, the actual pixels changed in the destination image depend on the values of the pixels under the new
drawing operation. The rules defining these combinations are
called transfer modes. These transfer modes provide a number of
flexible and powerful capabilities, many of which will be discussed throughout the course of the book. Figure 2-9 shows the
results of drawing "shape one" first and then drawing "shape
two" on top of it using one of eight different modes in turn.
These transfer modes are really Boolean operators that define the
results of combining two images as though they were simple bit
patterns.
The effects of the pen state on GraNerb trap calls vary from verb to
verb, as shown in Figure 2-10.
Given that the pen's state can be modified in many ways, it only
makes sense that there would be ways to obtain and preserve that
state. QuickDraw provides a PenState data structure and two traps,
GetPenState() and SetPenState(), to maintain pen state information.
Listing 2-3 shows the PenState data structures.

36

II>-

Chapter 2

Basic Drawing Technique and Theory

Source

Destination

Paint

Overlay

Invert

Erase

patCopy/srcCopy
Replace
destination with
the squrce.

patOr/srcOr
Add black pixels
from source to
destination.

patXor/srcXor
Add source to
destination but
black on black
becomes white

patBic/srcBic
Black pixels in
source "erase"
black pixels in
destination

.•• • •
,.·.: .
. J - j :•

•

• . 1.;• .• :
L_

notPatCopy/
NotSrcCopy
Replace
destination with
the inverted
source.

\

_i

i

NotPatOr/NotSrcOr
Add black pixels
from inverted
source to
destination.

Figure 2-9. Pen transfer modes

NotPatXor/
NotSrcXor
Black source pixels
do nothing but white
source pixels invert.

•

NotPatBic/NotSrcBic
All pixels turn white
except where both
source and destination
contain black.

~

Using Shapes

37

Frame

Paint
Fill

Erase
Invert

Figure 2-10. GraNerbs and PenStates
Listing 2-3. PenState data structures
typedef struct
{

Point
Point
· short
Pattern

pnLoc;
pnSize;
pnMode;
pnPat;

/*
/*
/*
/*

default:
default:
default:
default:

0, 0 *I
l, 1 */

srcCopy */
black */

PenState;

Notice that the pen's visibility state isn't accounted for in the PenState
data structure; it's maintained by QuickDraw in a separate data structure, as you will see later in this chapter. The PenNormal() trap allows
you to set the current pen values to the defaults listed here. These
three pen traps can be used together to facilitate robust drawing
without causing side effects to subsequent drawing operations. Listing 2-4 is a routine that shows an example of maintaining the pen
state while drawing.
Listing 2-4. Maintaining the pen state
void ARobustDrawingRoutine( void )
{

PenState savedPen;
/* obtain the current pen state */
GetPenState( &savedPen ) ;

38

..,.. Chapter 2

Basic Drawing Technique and Theory

/* set the default pen state */
PenNorrnal();

/* do a bunch of drawing here ... *I
/* restore the original pen state */
SetPenState( &savedPen );

~

Lines
The simplest drawing operations are the line-drawing operations.
Lines are drawn from one point to another. The starting point is
known as the current pen position and is the finishing point of the
previous line-drawing operation. Lines can be drawn from the current
pen position to a new absolute coordinate or to a specified horizontal
and vertical distance relative to (that is, away from) the pen position.
The pen can also be moved without drawing a line, again to either an
absolute or relative position. The following traps are particularly important, implementing most of QuickDraw's line drawing capabilities:
void LineTo(
short x,
short y ) ;

Draws a line from the current pen position to (x, y) and makes that the
new pen position.
void Line(
short x,
short y ) ;

Draws a line from the current pen position x points horizontally and y
points vertically. The new pen position becomes (old horizontal position+ x, old vertical position+ y).
void MoveTo(
short x,
short y ) ;

Positions the pen the same way as LineTo() does, but without drawing anything.

~

Using Shapes

39

void Move(
short x,
short y ) ;

Positions the pen the same way as Line() does, but without drawing
anything.
Listing 2-5 shows a simple example of line drawing.
Listing 2-5. Example of line drawing
void DrawLines( void )
{

short

i.
I

for (i=l; i<lO; i++)
MoveTo( 80, 20 );
LineTo( i*lO, i*15 ) ;

/*move to the starting point*/
/* draw a line outwards */

Figure 2-11 shows the results of calling DrawLines().

Figure 2-11. Results of calling Drawlines()

Although line-drawing traps aren't implemented by GraNerbs, the
appearance of drawn lines is determined primarily by the pen's transfer mode, size, and pattern.

40

llJJ>.

Chapter 2

Basic Drawing Technique and Theory

..,. Rectangles
Next to the Point, the Rect is the second most fundamental QuickDraw
data type. A Rect is the simplest data type that can define an area.
Rects can be expressed in two forms, as shown in Listing 2-6.
Listing 2-6. Rect data structure
/* primary form * /
typedef struct
{

short
short
short
short

left ;
top ;
right ;
bottom ;

Rect;
/ * alternate form */
typedef struct
{

Point
Point

topLeft ;
bottornRight ;

Rect ;

Figure 2-12 shows the structure of Rects as they relate to coordinate
planes.
(0, O)

top

left bottom right

2.

3,

6,

8 )

or
topleft
( 2. 3)

Figure 2-12. Rect structure, expressed visually

bottomRight
'

( 6. 8)

.,..

Note.,..

Using Shapes

41

Some compilers define both types of Rects together, using union
types (C) or variant records (Pascal). Other~. define only the fourmagnitudes form and optionally provide macros and other syntactical esoterica to allow your source code to fool the compiler
into thinking that you want the first form. You'll probably have
your choice of forms, although we prefer the primary form.
Many coordinate-naming variations will spfla~ up: x-y, h-v, leftright-top-bottom. You can keep yourself out of trouble by remembering tliat the X components always come before the Y
components in trap argument lists: X-y, H-v, eft-top-Right-bottom, and .so on.
Notice that only two of the four corner points are needed to define
any rectangle, the other two are redundant. Because of its compact
representation, the Rect is one of the most important QuickDraw data
types. Virtually every user interface object uses a rectangle to define a
"simple" boundary.
The fields of Rect variables are commonly assigned via the SetRect()
trap, but any of them can be assigned directly, as shown in Listing 2-7.
Listing 2-7 . Assigning values to Rect variables
voi d AssigningRects( void )
{

Rec t someRect ;
/* A Rect can be ass i gned this way ... *I
Se t Rect( &someRect , 20 , 25 , 100 , 80 ) ;
/ * ... or thi s way ins t ead . * I
someRect . left = 20 ;
someRect . top = 25 ;
someRect . right = 100 ;
someRect . bottom = 80 ;

~

Rectangle-Based Shapes
Rects aren't used only to define area; they are also used to express
three basic shapes: rectangles, rounded rectangles, and ovals. Examples of these shapes are shown in Figure 2-13.

42

~

Chapter 2 Basic Drawing Technique and Theory

Rectangle

RoundRect

Oval

The bounding rectangle is actually infinitely thin and invisible.
These shapes are framed with a 4 point medium-gray pen.

Figure 2-13. Rectangle-based shapes

Each of these three shapes has the full brace of five GraNerb drawing traps. The RoundRect shape traps require two additional arguments to specify the horizontal and vertical curvature of the corners.
These rounded corners are also known as fillets.
Note that there is a difference between calling a framing GraNerb
trap and drawing the shape with successive LineTo() or Line() calls.
The C routine shown in Listing 2-8 illustrates this point amply.
Listing 2-8. Line drawing versus framing
void NotTheSameRectangle( void )
{

Rect thisRect;
PenSize( 2, 2 ) ;
SetRect( &thisRect, 10, 10, 80, 80 ) ;
/* will draw black, completely inside "thisRect" */
PenPat ( black ) ;
FrameRect( &thisRect ) ;
/* will draw gray, to the right and down of "thisRect" */
PenPat ( gray ) ;
MoveTo( thisRect.left, thisRect.top );
LineTo( thisRect.right, thisRect.top );
LineTo( thisRect.right, thisRect.bottom ) ;
LineTo( thisRect.left, thisRect.bottom ) ;
LineTo( thisRect.left, thisRect.top ) ;

The results of calling NotTheSameRectangle() are shown in Figure 2-14.

.,.. Using Shapes

43

FrameRect ( )--a•

1-- LineTo ( )s

Figure 2-14. Results of calling NotTheSameRectangleO
Regions

A region is the QuickDraw data type used to describe a set of one or
more closed curves. Regions are one of the more innovative elements
of QuickDraw and are the primary data type used to describe an
irregularly shaped area. Like Rects, regions have five associated
GrafVerb traps, shown in Figure 2-15.
Regions are dynamically resizable. As with most variable-length
Macintosh data types, regions are relocatable and referenced through
Handles (RgnHandles, actually). The amount of memory allocated to
a region is maintained by the traps that modify it.
Regions contain a 16-bit integer value indicating their memory size
and a Rect at the beginning of the data structure that describes the
smallest rectangular bounding area, called the rgnBBox (region bounding box). The relationship between a region and its bounding box is
shown in Figure 2-16.
The remainder of the region is composed of scanline-oriented data
describing the actual shape of the region within the bounding rectangle. The Region data structure is shown in Listing 2-9.
Listing 2-9. Region data structure
typedef struct
{

short
Rect
char

rgnSize;
rgnBBox;
rgnData[l];

Region, *RgnPtr, **RgnHandle;

44

~

Chapter 2 Basic Drawing Technique and Theory

Background pattern
Current pen pattern

. . .. . ... ......... . . ... ..

....
....::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
...
..
............ ....
.....
.. .....
:::::::::·
.. ...
........
..::::::::
.........
..
....
..
...
......
.
..
.
..
..
.
.
..
.....
....
.
..
...
.
.
..
.. .
...
.....
......
...
.......
......

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~:~::::::::::::::::::::::::~j~j~j~j

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
EraseRgn (myRegion)

FrameRgn (myRegion)

lnvertRgn (myRegion)

·:·:·:·:·:·:·:·:·:·:·:·:·:·:-:-:-:-:-:-:-:-:-:-:
::::::::za
:~
·~
::~:
:~:::::
::·:::·:::·:::-:::·::::::::::

" " "' ~· ·· ·

r..1)•••••

FillRgn (myRegion, myPat)

PaintRgn (myRegion)

Figure 2-15. Results of GraNerb operations on a region

Figure 2- 16. Region and bounding box

~

Using Shapes

45

Notice that the rgnData field is declared as a single-element array; in
practice, it can be anywhere from 0 to 64K. The actual size of a region
is maintained dynamically by the region traps. This syntax is yet
another of the compiler-twisting games that we'll get involved with
over the course of this book. Regions and other variable-length data
types are declared with the last field in the structure being a singleelement array in order to facilitate array referencing of the dynamically allocated data at the end of a Handle. Such data types are
usually accessed through Handles; rarely, if ever, are they referenced
through their base type. For example, regions are always accessed
through RgnHandles; variables of type "Region" should never be
explicitly declared or used.
Creating Regions

Unlike Rects and other simple fixed-length data types, region data
cannot be directly assigned; rather they are created by "opening'' them
and calling other QuickDraw line-drawing and frame-drawing traps
to define their extent. When the desired area is defined, the region is
then closed. Listing 2-10 shows an example of creating a region.
Listing 2-10. Creating a region
RgnHandle

CreateSarnpleRegion ( void )

{

RgnHandle

sarnpleRgn;

sarnpleRgn = NewRgn();

/* allocate new region */

OpenRgn();
MoveTo( 50, 50 );
Line( 80, 0 );
Line( -10, -10 );
Line( 20, 0 );
Line( -10, 10 );

/* open for region drawing */
/* sketch a rectangle */
/* with triangles at the corners */

Line(
Line(
Line(
Line(

0, 130 ) ;
10, 10 ) ;
-20, 0 ) i
10, -10 ) ;

Line(
Line(
Line(
Line(

-80, 0 ) i
-10, 10 ) ;
20, 0 ) ;
-10, -10 ) ;

46

..,. Chapter 2 Basic Drawing Technique and Theory

Line ( 0 , -13 0 ) ;
Line( - 10 , -10 ) ;
Line ( 2 O, 0 ) ;
Line( - 10 , 10 ) ;
CloseRgn( sampleRgn ) ; / * close the region, accumul a ting * /
/ * the result into sampleRgn * /
return s ampleRgn ;

Calling CreateSarnpleRegion() would produce the region in Figure
2-17, framed here with FrameRgnO to illustrate it.

Figure 2- 17. Results of calling CreateSampleRegion()

Important.,..

When a region is opened, the pen is hidden until the region is
closed; consequently, no visiOle drawing occurs. If drawing is to
take place at the same time that a region is being built, the
ShowPenO trap should be called immediately after the region
has been opened. The HidePen() trap will hide the pen and
should be called before closing the region to balance the
ShowPen() call.
Additionally, only one region may be open at .rtime per GrafPort,
and that region must be closed before handling an event. The
GrafPort data structure is described later in this chapter.

.,.. Using Shapes

. 47

Regions and Set Theory Traps

Regions can also be defined from other regions using QuickDraw
traps that perform familiar set theory operations over the area that
each region operand describes. The set theory traps are:
void SectRgn(
RgnHandle
RgnHandl e
RgnHandle

rgnl,
rgn2 ,
destRgn ) ;

Set "destRgn" equal to the intersection of two regions.
void DiffRgn(
RgnHandle
RgnHandle
RgnHandle

rgnl,
rgn2,
destRgn ) ;

Set "destRgn" equal to the difference of two regions.
void UnionRgn(
RgnHandle
RgnHandle
RgnHandle

rgnl,
rgn2,
destRgn ) ;

Set "destRgn" equal to the union (inclusive or) of two regions.
void XorRgn(
RgnHandle
RgnHandle
RgnHandle

rgnl,
rgn2,
destRgn ) ;

Set "destRgn" equal to the union minus the intersection (exclusive or)
of two regions.
In each case, "destRgn" must already exist (created via NewRgn())
before the set theory trap is called. Additionally, the "destRgn" argument can be the same as the "rgnl" or "rgn2" argument.

48

~

Chapter 2 Basic Drawing Technique and Theory

Important .,..

As of the System 6.0.5 software release, all four of these region set
theory traps have the additional restriction that the sum of the first
two source regions' data must be less than 32K, or the trap may
corrupt the application's heap. This is true ·regardless of what the
size of the destination region would have been had the trap succeeded. Check the sum of the sizes of the RgnHandles before
calling one of these traps.
Figure 2-18 shows examples and results of using these set theory
calculation traps .

2

UnionRgn( Rgn1, Rgn2, DestRgn )

SectRgn( Rgn1, Rgn2, DestRgn )

2

XorRgn( Rgn1, Rgn2, DestRgn)

DiffRgn( Rgn1, Rgn2, DestRgn )
Rgn1 =

0 Rgn2 0
=

filled

Dest Rgn =in black

Figure 2-18. Effects of the region set theory traps

.,.

Using Shapes

49

Other Region Calculation Traps

Regions can also be created from other regions using QuickDraw
traps that perform set theory operations over the area that each region
operand describes. These traps are:
void OffsetRgn (
RgnHandle
theRgn,
dx,
short
dy ) ;
short

Move "theRgn" by "dx" pixels to the right and by "dy" pixels toward
the bottom. Negative values shift the region to the left and upward .
void InsetRgn (
RgnHandle
short
short

theRgn ,
dx ,
dy ) ;

Inset "theRgn" by "dx" pixels on each horizontal size and by "d y"
pixels on each vertical size. Negative values "outset" the region.
Warning: Insetting a region by large amounts may cause it to go
empty. If you're unsure of a region's dimensions before calling this
trap, make sure to check it with EmptyRgn() afterward.
void MapRgn (
RgnHandle
Rect
Rect

theRgn ,
*srcRect ,
*destRect ) ;

Inset "theRgn" to fit inside of "srcRect" and then scale it up to
"destRect." Warning: Calling this trap with an empty region causes
application failure.
Important~

Apple discourages programmers from tinkering directly with a
region's data, and it hasn't publis\}ed the format of the data itself.
Fortunately, Apple has provided a pretty complete set of traps to
manipulate the data. There should be no need to determine that
data format, but tinkerers with time on their hands can feel free
to discover it on their own.

50

.,.. Chapter 2

Basic Drawing Technique and Theory

As you can see, regions play a number of roles in Macintosh applications programming. Refer to volumes in the Inside Macintosh series
for other nifty region calculation traps.
Using Rectangles and Regions

Rects and regions permeate the QuickDraw environment and are used
in most calculation and drawing operations. Virtually all familiar
Macintosh graphic objects are visually defined by some group of Rects
and regions. It's quite likely that Rects and regions will end up
defining your application's specialized graphics objects, too. Listing
2-11 shows an example of drawing a simple object based on drawing
rectangle-based shapes.
Listing 2-11. Drawing simple graphic objects with Rects and regions
void DrawTruck( void
{

RgnHandle
Rect
Rect

tiresRgn;
hitchR, box""R;
cabR, tiresR;

PenSize( 2, 2 ) ;
PenPat ( black ) ;
/* draw the tires first */
tiresRgn = NewRgn();
OpenRgn();
SetRect( &tiresR, 0, 0, 30, 30 ) ;
OffsetRect( &tiresR, 30, 150 ) ;
FrameOval( &tiresR );
OffsetRect( &tiresR, 110, O ) ;
FrameOval( &tiresR);
OffsetRect( &tiresR, 60, 0 ) ;
Frameoval( &tiresR ) ;
OffsetRect( &tiresR, 45, 0 );
FrameOval( &tiresR );
CloseRgn( tiresRgn ) ;
PaintRgn( tiresRgn ) ;
DisposeRgn( tiresRgn );

/* build the hitch */
SetRect( &hitchR, 0, 0, 40, 20 ) ;
OffsetRect( &hitchR, 160, 125 ) ;
FrameRect( &hitchR );

~

Using Shapes

51

/* build the cab */
SetRect( &cabR, 0, 0, 60, 45 );
OffsetRect( &cabR, 190, 55 );
FrarneRoundRect( &cabR, 16, 16 ) ;

PenPat( white);
SetRect( &cabR, 0, 0, 100, 70 ) ;
OffsetRect( &cabR, 190, 95 ) ;
PaintRoundRect( &cabR, 16, 16 );
PenPat( black ) ;
FrarneRoundRect( &cabR, 16, 16 );
/* finally, draw the box itself */
PenPat( ltGray ) ;
SetRect( &boxR, 0, 0, 160, 125 ) ;
OffsetRect( &boxR, 20, 40 ) ;
PaintRect( &boxR ) ;

PenPat( black ) ;
FrarneRect( &boxR );

Calling DrawTruck() produces the trucklike drawing shown in
Figure 2-19.

Figure 2-19. Results of calling DrawTruck()

52

.,.. Chapter 2 Basic Drawing Technique and Theory

Emptiness

Rects and regions are the only shapes that can be used in point
membership calculations. QuickDraw provides two traps, PtlnRect()
and PtlnRgn(), that are used to determine whether a point (for example, the current location of the mouse) is inside the borders of one
of these boundary structures. Since Rects and regions are the only
shapes that can be tested for point membership, you may want to
create regions out of other shapes that need to be tested for point
membership, for example, when deciding if a user clicked inside of a
rounded rectangle.
Not all Rects and regions define a boundary: If a Rect's right value
is less than or equal to its left value, or if its bottom value is less than
or equal to its top value, then that Rect is said to be empty. An empty
region is somewhat harder to describe. Basically, a region is empty if it
encloses zero points. For example, a region created by a single LineTo()
call will always be empty. Rects and regions can and should be tested
for "emptiness" before using them in drawing and calculation operations. QuickDraw provides EmptyRect() and EmptyRgn(), which are
used to determine whether any point could be inside the borders. In
simple terms, nonempty Rects and regions define an area, whereas
empty ones define no area. Drawing an empty structure will not draw
anything: No pixels will be changed, no ink will laid down. Figure
2-20 shows how InsetRect() can cause a Rect to become empty.

'· l
!i

f

I'

l
i

-- -- -H-f-Ne¥t sorom _.

=-:=~

--- --+--l=~~t::=-.

-1--SetRect (myRect, 1,1,5,5
I

I

I

I

I

I

..

I

---tt---t-'--t--NiJw ll'[o,.

I
i

--······-·· ·-········--I--+--+--+-,-fo-'-t--+f-

-f-lnlset~ec~ (myReft, Of 3+

Modifying a rectangle so that its bottom< top (or right< left) makes it "empty."

Figure 2-20. Empty versus nonempty Rects

~

Using Shapes

53

Common Region Problems

There are a few mistakes that can trip you up when you are using
regions. Checking the following conditions can help to avoid most
problems.
• Was the region allocated via NewRgn() before you tried to use
it? - Trying to use an unallocated region usually results in quick
application failure.
• Is the region empty? - A number of conditions can cause a
region to be empty, which when drawn, yield nothing. Common
cases are: trying to create a region with line-drawing operations
that don't quite enclose an area; using drawing traps other than
Frame- to define area; reducing to nothing via InsetRgnO; and
numerous cases involving the set theory region traps. Use
EmptyRgn() often; it will save hours of debugging.
• Is the region corrupt? - A corrupted region behaves very much
like an empty one. Corrupted regions result from operations that
would result in a region that is too large (greater than 64K) or too
complex (greater than 25 crossings per horizontal scan line).
• Are the region's coordinates reasonable?- If the region's bounding rectangle begins at 20,000 instead of 200, you'll need a pretty
big window to see it when it is drawn .

.,... Polygons
Polygons are used to draw shapes composed of three or more line
segments. Listing 2-12 shows the Polygon data structure.
Listing 2- 12. Polygon data structure
typedef struct
{

short
Rect
char

polySize;
polyBBox;
polyData[lJ;

Polygon, *PolyPtr, **PolyHandle;

In many ways, polygons are similar to regions; they are a Handlebased, variable-length data type, created by opening, drawing lines,
and closing, and they have the same five GraNerb drawing traps as

54

~

Chapter 2 Basic Drawing Technique and Theory

regions. If you recall Figure 2-6, "QuickDraw shapes and operations",
you'll notice that regions have all the functionality of polygons, and
more. So why do polygons exist and what ace they good for?
• Data size - Polygons are based on a compact point list, rather
than the scan line change format of regions. Generally speaking,
polygons take up much less memory than regions. The region
example a few pages back required 1004 bytes; a similar polygon
requires only 66 bytes.
• Accuracy of representation - Polygons are endpoint-based, as
compared to regions, which are scan line-based. Because of this,
polygons can be scaled horizontally and/ or vertically without
inducing severe shape distortion. Polygon scaling is accomplished
via the InsetPoly() or MapPoly() traps, both of which do a much
better job of preserving the polygon's proportions than either
InsetRgn() or MapRgnO do of preserving a region's proportions.
• Greater complexity - Polygons don't have the 64K limitation
that hampers regions.
Unfortunately, polygons lack many of the important features that
exist for regions. There is no PtlnPoly() trap; otherwise, polygons
could be used for many of the things that regions are used for. Polygons cannot be combined via set theory operations, as no such traps
are implemented. For obvious reasons, polygons cannot define curves.
So what good are polygons? Polygons are good for drawing! Regions are meant to be used primarily for defining areas rather than
drawing with them. Together polygons and regions provide solid,
sensible tools for the display and management of irregularly shaped
areas. Listing 2-13 shows a routine that produces a polygon that
defines the same area as the earlier region example in Figure 2-17.
Notice that the rectangular area is defined with line drawing rather
than a FrameRect(); polygons can only be defined using Line() and
LineTo() calls.
Listing 2- 13. Example of creating a polygon
PolyHandle CreateSarnplePoly( void )
{

PolyHandle

sarnplePoly;

samplePoly = OpenPoly();
MoveTo( 50, 50 ) ;
Line( 80, 0 ) ;

/*open for polygon drawing*/
/* sketch a rectangle */
/* with triangles at the corners */

~

Using Shapes

55

Line( -1 0 , -10 ) ;
Line( 20 , 0 ) ;
Line( -10 , 10 ) ;
Line(
Line(
Line(
Line(

0 ' 130 ) ;
10 , 10 ) ;
-20 , 0 ) ;
10, - 10 ) ;

Line(
Line(
Line(
Line(

-80 , 0 ) ;
-10 , 10 ) ;
20 , 0 ) ;
-10 , -10 ) ;

Line ( 0 , -13 0 ) ;
Line( -10 , -10 ) ;
Line ( 2 0 , 0 ) ;
Line( -10, 10 ) ;
ClosePoly() ;

/ * close the polygon, accumulating the */
/* result into samplePoly * /

return samplePoly ;

As with creating regions, opening a polygon hides the pen, and
makes it visible when the polygon is closed.
On the Source Code Disk, see last page, you can find PolyUtils, a
pair of routines that generate regular polygons and vertex point lists,
which can be used for a number of useful and interesting effects.
Note~

Some of the Polygon GrafVerb traps behave differently from
other GrafVerb traps. Unlike all other fill shape traps, FilIPolyO
only fills inside the polygon; the lower-right edges aren't filled.
FramePoly() qraws outside the lower-right edges of the defined
shape, unlike the other frame traps, which draw entirely inside
the defined shape.

..,. Arcs and Wedges
Arcs are shapes that are portions of ovals, and wedges are filled arcs.
Arcs are similar to RoundRect shapes: As shown in Figure 2-21, they
are defined by a bounding rectangle and two integer values that
define a start angle and an arc length. These values are specified as
clockwise offsets from 12 o'clock.

56

llJIJ-

Chapter 2

Basic Drawing Technique and Theory

0 degrees

Bounding
rectangle

---------~--,

Sta~ angle

\

\

\\!

""- t

270 degrees

90 degrees

Swe,'1ip angle

/I
180 degrees
Example arc, with a starting angle of 45 degrees, a sweep
angle of 100 degrees, and a square bounds rectangle.

Figure 2-21. Arc definition

Arc and wedge drawing involves all of the familiar GraNerbs.
However, QuickDraw arcs are fairly limited. With the exception of
Pt2Angle(), there are no arc calculation traps. Arc GraNerb traps
cannot be used to create regions. Still, arcs have their place, and you
will probably find uses for them. Listing 2-14 shows an example of
using arcs.
Listing 2-14. Example of arc drawing
void DrawArcsAndWedges( void )
{

Rect
short

arcBoundsRect;
i;

/* set bounding rect */
SetRect( &arcBoundsRect, 0, 0, 40, 40 ) ;
OffsetRect( &arcBoundsRect, 20, 20 ) ;
/* draw six framed arcs */
for (i=O; i<6; i++)
{

FrameArc( &arcBoundsRect, i*60, 60 ) ;
OffsetRect( &arcBoundsRect, 50, 0 ) ;

..,. Using Shapes

57

I* set bounding rect: move below previous one */
SetRect( &arcBoundsRect, 0, 0, 40, 40 ) ;
OffsetRect( &arcBoundsRect, 20, 80 ) ;

/* draw six filled arcs (wedges) */
for (i=O; i<6; i++)
{

FillArc( &arcBoundsRect, i*60, 60, gray);
OffsetRect( &arcBoundsRect, 50, 0 );

Executing DrawArcsAndWedges() produces the results in Figure 2-22.

)

(

Figure 2-22. Result of DrawArcsAndWedges()
~

Basic Text
A graphics computer without text capabilities would certainly be
severely limited. The Macintosh provides a number of text-handling
capabilities to replace the "hard-wired" character interfaces of other
computer systems. These facilities involve a handful of managers.
QuickDraw's primary role in text processing is the display of single
characters and short character strings. But before we delve into text
programming, a historical digression is in order.
Text and Computers, Then and Now
A computer system's ability to edit and display text is often taken for
granted. Reading and writing from an input/ output "hose" are standard programming language and library features familiar to most
programmers. Screen-based text 1/0 involved writing code similar to
that shown in Listing 2-15.

58

IJJI>

Chapter 2

Basic Drawing Technique and Theory

Listing 2- 15. Supporting text interaction
<C>
char

worldResponse[64];

printf( "Hello, World! Are you there?" ) ;
scanf ( "%d", worldResponse ) ;
<Pascal>
yourAnswer: String[64];
writeln( 'James Worthy and Nick Wirth are soul brothers,
T/F?

'

);

readln( yourAnswer ) ;

In the recent past, computer users (and software developers) didn't
expect much more than these capabilities. Computers generally weren't
thought of as document processing machines. The successes of the
graphical user interface and the advent of the high-resolution laserbased printer and its "realistic" (or if you insist, WYSIWYG) presentation for text services have turned those attitudes around. Users now
expect high-quality text display on screen and on hardcopy. This complicates matters for programmers. Our little text file and stream editors are no longer sufficient for much of anything beyond writing
software itself, and even then these text tools are often found lacking.

Basic Text Traps
At the ground level, QuickDraw has a small number of basic text
drawing traps:
void DraWChar(
char
aCharValue );

This is as simple as it gets: This trap draws a single character.
void Drawstring(
char
*aPString ) ;

This trap draws a Pascal string of characters. If you're not a Pascal
programmer, a Pascal string is a single unsigned byte indicating the
number of characters in the string, followed by the character values
themselves. Because an unsigned byte can only represent values between 0 and 255, the maximum length of a Pascal string is limited to
255 characters.

.,.. Using Shapes

59

void DrawText (
char
*textPtr ,
short textLen ) ;

This trap is similar to DrawString(), except that the number of characters to be drawn is passed separately from the character data. Therefore, the 255-character limitation of Drawstring() isn't applicable.
void TextBox (
Ptr
textPtr ,
short textLen ,
short textJustify ,
Rect
*boxRect ) ;

This trap is similar to DrawText(), except that it draws text inside of a
specified rectangle, with a specified text justification. It's a convenient
way to painlessly display text within a given area, automatically
computing breaks between lines and words. Note that TextBox() is a
TextEdit trap, and not part of QuickDraw.
These traps draw characters using the environment's current typeface settings. With the exception of TextBox(), these traps don't format
text. They don't compute line breaks, nor do they handle special
characters, such as returns, tabs, and backspaces. We did warn you
that using text wasn't easy.
Important .,._

Characters within a font are defined in fixed-point measurements.
Because of this fact, drawing a string with DrawStrlng() doesn't
always produce the same result as drawing each character with
DrawChar(). Drawstring() accumulates the fractional portion
as each character is drawn and positions the next character
appropriately.
Additionally, calculations are performed to use the font and vertically position characters for each DrawChar() or Draw$trbtg() call.
Since DrawString() performs these calculations only once for the
entire string, it will execute substantially faster than a. corresponding sequence of DrawChar() calls.

60

~

Chapter 2 Basic Drawing Technique and Theory

Mixed Typefaces

The appearance of a mixed typeface capability required a whole new
layer of text support, which Apple began to support with the introduction of the Lisa computer in 1982. This machine was the first to
combine a fast processor with good text-drawing routines and a large
base of digitized typefaces.
The Macintosh provides software access to these text facilities in three
pieces: the Font Manager, QuickDraw, and TextEdit, which correspond
roughly to low-, medium-, and high-level text-handling capabilities.
The linkages between these managers and other text-related facilities
in the Macintosh operating system are illustrated in Figure 2-23.
Printing
QuickDraw
TextEdit

Font
Manager

Resource
Manager

Memory
Manager

Figure 2-23. Text managers and functional areas

The most familiar text attributes are:
• Font face or font family-A group of typefaces that comes from
a common design, commonly referred to as a font. Every font has
a name and an ID.
• Type size - The height of the tallest characters plus a bit of
spacing between lines. Type size is usually measured in points,
not to be confused with the QuickDraw Point data structure. A
point is approximately equal to the size of your average screen
pixel: 72 pixels per Macintosh SE screen-inch; 72.27 points per
inch. This size difference is important when you are drawing
strings of characters and will be discussed in later chapters.
• Type style - Additional stylizing of the font face. Common
stylings are bold, italic, underline, ouUii.nie, and shadow. The
styles condensed and extended are merely adjustments to the
spacing between characters. A lack of style is just "plain." There
are a large number of other styles you may be familiar with that
QuickDraw doesn't directly support, such as strike-through, double
underline, and so forth. If you feel imaginative, you could even
make up a few yourself.

.,. Using Shapes

61

Conveniently, QuickDraw provides traps to control each of those
typeface attributes:
void TextFont (
short fontNurn ) ;

This trap sets the current font ID. There are constants for many of the
more familiar font IDs: Chicago, Monaco, Helvetica, and so forth.
In the past, only the font ID was used in drawing. Font IDs are
obtained by passing a font name to the GetFNum() trap and using the
returned font ID. Similarly, a font's name can be obtained from a font
ID using the GetFontNameO trap.
Note~

The SetFontName() trap is a recent and welcome feature addition,
introduced in version 1.2 of 32-bit QuickDraw. It provides the capability to use font names to directly specify the current typeface
without first obtaining the font ID. This avoids some of the problems that result when switching between Macintosh systems
where the matching font names and IDs are different.
Prior to System 7.0, the System font ID (used in user interface
titles and controls) was zero, and the default application font ID
was one. These font ID numbers are now obtained using the new
GetSystemFontID() and GetApplFontlD() traps.
void TextSize (
short sizeValue ) ;

This trap sets the current font size, in points. A sizeValue of zero
indicates the standard System font size, which is typically 12 points.
void TextFace (
short stylesValue ) ;

This trap sets the current typeface style to any combination of the
seven standard type styles or to plain. Styles are usually defined in
development system interface files as an enumerated type or small set
of integers.
void TextMode (
short modeValue ) ;

62

..,. Chapter 2 Basic Drawing Technique and Theory

This trap is identical in functionality to the PenMode() trap, except
that the results apply to only text drawing rather than shape drawing.
The default text mode is srcOr, compared to PatCopy for the pen
mode. Like styles, modes are also typically defined as an enumerated
type or a small set of integers.
srcCopy writes all of the bits in the character's rectangle. Because
srcOr writes only those bits that make up the actual character, using
srcOr generally produces more aesthetic results, especially when drawing text on top of previously drawn graphic objects.
Listing 2-16 shows an example of using these text traps.
Listing 2-16. Example of typeface control
/*
**draw some simple text, while
**preserving the current text state
*/

void DrawSomeText( void
{

GrafPtr
Style
short

savedPort;
savedFontFace;
savedFontID, savedFontSize, savedTextMode;

/* get current text state */
GetPort( &savedPort ) ;
savedFontID = savedPort->txFont;
savedFontSize
savedPort->txSize;
savedFontFace
savedPort->txFace;
savedPort->txMode;
savedTextMode
/* do some texting here */
TextFont( helvetica ) ;
TextSize( 24 ) ;
TextFace( bold I outline ) ;
TextMode( srcXor ) ;
MoveTo( 40, 40 );
Drawstring ( "\pOoh...

Scary!" ) ;

/* restore original text state */
TextFont( savedFontID );
TextSize( savedFontSize ) ;
TextFace( savedFontFace );
TextMode( savedTextMode );

~

Using Shapes

63

MoveTo( 40 , 70 ) ;
Drawstring ( " \ p Not so s cary ." ) ;

Executing DrawSomeText() produces the visible result shown in
Figure 2-24.

Not so scary.
Figure 2-24. Results of DrawSomeText()

I By the Way IJl> I

Apple has created something of a permanent misnomer by calling
typefaces "fonts" and styles "faces." For consistency's sake,
Apple's usage of these terms will be used from here on out. If
you find yourself getting confused, just repeat the mantra MultiFont-Size-Style until you feel at ease.
Typeface Management Details

The Font Manager handles most of the ugly math-intensive details of
maintaining and using typefaces. It manages a family of about twenty
resource types that contain font information (font metrics) and generates small bit patterns known as BitMaps for each character in that
font. BitMaps are discussed is some detail in the next two chapters.
Each character has a specific horizontal and vertical size along with a
placement on the line of text currently being drawn. A bitmapped font
is an example of what is known as a screen font. Most screen fonts are
formatted as QuickDraw bitmaps at a resolution of 72 dots per inch or
greater. The Font Manager does such a nice job of managing these
sordid details that most applications can ignore them. Figure 2-25
shows the basic attributes of a typeface.
Understand that Macintosh typefaces have never been restricted to
these bitmap-based resource formats . The QuickDraw-to-PostScript
translation process has been with us since the introduction of the
LaserWriter. But the Macintosh Toolbox hasn't been expanded to handle
the display of text beyond the Font Manager's resource formats. True,

64

..,. Chapter 2

Basic Drawing Technique and Theory

Ascent line
Ascent
Base line

Descent

Descent line
Leading
(distance to next line)

Figure 2-25. Character font attributes
PostScript fonts can be rendered into GrafPorts and displayed, but
they generally look inferior to their screen-based cousins.
In early 1990, a number of font management applications made their
debut that have all but eliminated the bitmapped dominance of the
screen by bitmapped fonts. The tools and standards developed by
Apple, Microsoft, Adobe, and a handful of other developers have
extended the realm of high-quality typeface far beyond the Macintosh
horizon, providing numerous facilities for the import and export of
typeface descriptions between the Macintosh and other popular computer platforms. For many applications, the Macintosh developer needs
only to follow a small number of simple rules regarding typeface
management.
With the advent of System 7.0, QuickDraw fonts can be defined by a
series of drawing commands, or strokes. These fonts are referred to as
outline fonts and are handled by the system software called TrueType.
Outline fonts have a number of advantages over bitmapped fonts. The
most significant advantage is that they can be scaled, or drawn at any
resolution, without suffering the affliction known as aliasing. An example of aliasing is shown in Figure 2-26.

A

Outline font

Bitmap font

Figure 2-26. Smooth A versus jagged A

~

Using Shapes

65

Aliasing is the visual symptom of accumulated roundoff error.
Aliasing is the scourge of graphics programmers everywhere and is
probably the leading cause of WIGWNWIS (What I Got Was Not What
I Saw), the mortal enemy of WYSIWYG.
The GetFontlnfo() trap can be quite useful when drawing lots of
small text fragments, or if the exact placement of these text fragments
is critical. It fills a Fontinfo variable with point measurements of the
basic font attributes, which can be used to place lines of text properly
in relation to one another. The Font Manager trap can also be employed to provide more extensive information, as well as the ability to
generate fractional Fixed-point font metrics.
Advanced Text Management?

Brace yourself for a shock: there isn't any advanced text management!
Consider this warning carefully: TextEdit isn't a text editor. TextEdit
was originally created to support small amounts of text in dialog
windows. Many of its original design requirements remain severe
function limitations to this day. Although TextEdit appears chock-full
of useful multiple typeface-editing features, it's limited to handling a
maximum of 32K of text at a time, and it behaves sluggishly even
when handling a lot less. The complexities of multiple typeface editing may induce you to develop some TextEdit-based scheme; you
wouldn't be the first to try. If your text-editing needs are moderate,
then TextEdit is for you. If you need industrial-strength text editing,
you're better off building a TextEdit of your own using the primitive
text traps.
1111-

Pictures
The Picture is one of the most powerful QuickDraw features. It provides the ability to collect the results of multiple drawing commands
in a single package and display them in a single stroke. The Picture
data structure is shown in Listing 2-17.
Listing 2- 17. Picture data structure
typedef struct
{

Rect
short
char

picFrame;
picSize;
picData[l];

Picture, **PicHandle;

66

~

Chapter 2 Basic Drawing Technique and Theory

You may notice the similarity between the Region, Polygon, and
Picture data structures. It's more than a coincidence: Pictures are
created and used in a fashion similar to that employed with regions
and polygons. Creating a picture involves the by now familiar threestep process of open-draw-close:
• A picture is opened via the OpenPicture() trap, and the pen is
hidden. Unlike polygons and regions, a picture doesn't have
to be allocated before drawing into it. That's taken care of by
OpenPicture(). The rectangle argument passed into OpenPicture()
defines the picture's coordinate system when the picture is later
played back.
• The desired shape- and line-drawing traps are called. The results
are "tokenized": GraNerbs get converted into QuickDraw opcodes
and the shape data structure values are saved as operands. The
size of the open picture is maintained by QuickDraw.
• The picture is closed via ClosePicture(). The pen is shown. The
resulting picture is stored in memory allocated by QuickDraw,
and referenced through a PicHandle variable.
The tokenized format produced by OpenPicture() is known as the
PICT format and is the primary format for displayable image data on
the Macintosh. The PICT format is extremely important to Macintosh
graphics programming and is recognized and understood by other
Toolbox managers, particularly the Dialog and Scrap (Clipboard) managers. Apple has encouraged application developers to provide some
degree of PICT understanding, and developers have, by and large,
complied. The result? PICT is a near-universal means of graphics data
interchange between many Macintosh applications. In addition to
being a RAM-based format, the PICT format is also used as a file
format for pictures in resources and data files.
The creation of pictures is subject to some of the same restrictions
imposed on region creation. Only one picture can be open at a time in
a given GrafPort. However, many pictures can be open in an application, and they can stay open across calls to the WaitNextEvent() trap.
Using Pictures

A picture thus created can be drawn in its entirety with a single,
simple call to the (what else?) DrawPicture() trap. This trap takes a
PicHandle and a boundary Rect (or boundsRect) argument. The
"boundsRect" can be a copy of the rectangle found in the PicHandle

..,.

Using Shapes

67

itself, or it can be altogether different. Offsetting the rectangle allows a
picture to be drawn anchored to a position different than the one
where it was created. Changing the dimensions (the difference between top and left, bottom and right) will cause a picture to be scaled
to fit the new rectangle. Drawing a picture into a new rectangle will
cause distortion if the new rectangle is not proportional to the original. Figure 2-27 shows the effects of picture scaling.
Scaled bounds rect

"Native" bounds rect

,-----------1

,-------1

I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
IL _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ JI

I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
IL _ _ _ _ _ _ _ JI

----+

Figure 2-27. Scaling a picture into a different rectangle
Caution.,.

You may have noticed that a picture contains a picSize field. It
isn't always correct and should never be used to determine a
picture's size in memory! Originally, pictures were limited in size
to 32K; the 16-bit picSize field was guaranteed to hold all legal
picture size values. With the introduction of Color QuickDraw,
pictures were allowed to be larger than 32K, out of absolute necessity. The proper way to obtain a picture's byte count is shown
in Listing 2-18.
Listing 2- 18. Obtaining a picture's byte count
long FetchPictSize(
PicHandle
somePicHandle
if (somePicHandle !=NULL)
return GetHandleSize( (Handle)somePicHand l e ) ;
else
return (long) O;

68

..,. Chapter 2 Basic Drawing Technique and Theory

Using Picture Resources

Pictures are commonly accessed from resources. The GetPictureO trap
retrieves picture data from a 'PICT' resource with a specified resource
ID number and returns a PicHandle to that resource's data. If the
Picture resource cannot be found, a NULL is returned. The PicHandle
thus retrieved can be directly used without any additional work other
than determining the desired bounds rectangle to render the picture into.
Caution.,..

As with all resources, 'PICT' resources are purged if their home
resource file is closed. DrawPicture() will crash if passed a NULL,
purged, or otherwise invalid Handle. If an application needs to
keep a PicHandle around, it should disassociate it from the 'PICT'
resource's home resource file, as shown in Listing 2-19.
There have been some reports of pictures getting purged during
DrawPicture(), especially if the picture is particularly large.
Beware!
Listing 2-19. Accessing a 'PICT' resource
void DrawPictResource(
short pictRsrcID )
PicHandlesomePict ;
somePict = GetPicture ( pictRsrcID ) ;
if (somePict != NULL)
{

/ *note : not necessary under System 7 . 0 */
HNoPurge ( somePict ) ;
DrawPictures ( somePict ) ;
KillPicture ( somePict ) ;

Limits of Pictures

Given that pictures have so much flexible functionality, you might
wonder when not to use them. Every perfect thing in the world seems
to have some thorns, and pictures are no exception; their drawbacks
include:

1111>

The GrafPort

69

• Limited command repertoire - There are some QuickDraw drawing traps whose results cannot be captured by OpenPicture().
Familiar graphic operations not currently supported by Apple
(particularly curve drawing) can be supported using PicComments
and substitute bottleneck GrafProcs (described only briefly in
Inside Macintosh and various Tech Notes), but making PicComments
universally understood by other applications is impossible without universal cooperation. PicComments and bottleneck routines
are still very useful.
• Slower drawing speed - Pictures can draw slower than the
corresponding trap calls. The DrawPicture() trap is really a PICT
interpreter. As with most interpreters, there is a performance
penalty to be paid. The larger and more complex the picture, the
greater the penalty.
• Difficult to analyze - Once a picture is created, it's cumbersome
to extract information regarding its contents.
Note Ill>

Until recently, writing complex custom bottleneck procs was the
only way to look at a picture's innards. The System7 version of
QuickDraw introduced the Picture Utilities Package, which
implements a number of picture analysis tools. This Packagebased Manager is examined at length rn:Chapter

s:

Despite their limitations, pictures are an important and useful part
of Macintosh graphics programming .

..,.. The GrafPort
We've been discussing shape and text drawing as if it just happens,
avoiding any discussion of where it happens. Now it's time to talk
about drawing in something, whether that "something" is a window,
a document to be printed, or a drawing area offscreen. As discussed in
Chapter 1, only a small number of arguments are passed explicitly to
drawing routines; the vast majority of the drawing parameters are
maintained by the graphics environment. In the world of Macintosh
graphics programming, the state of the graphics environment is described by a GrafPort. The results of drawing actions are determined
largely by the values contained within fields of a GrafPort. The shapedrawing and calculation traps discussed earlier either modify GrafPort

70

~

Chapter 2 Basic Drawing Technique and Theory

fields or rely on existing GrafPort field values to make drawing decisions. GrafPorts are most commonly used to define and manipulate
the contents of a window, but they are also used to define offscreen
drawing and printing as well. A GrafPort contains functional information for the following domains:
• Pen state information - Size, pattern, location, pen transfer
mode. There are actually three Patterns: the current pen, the
filling, and the background (erasing) pattern.
• Text information - Font ID, size, style, text transfer mode.
• Drawing destination - A BitMap, which may belong to an onscreen window; an offscreen drawing buffer or other hardcopy
output device, for example, a printer.
• Drawing boundary regions and coordinate system - The portRect
field, together with its portBits.bounds field, defines a GrafPort's
coordinate system.
• Pen color - Appearance of individual pixels, whether they are
black, white, gray, or colored.
• Addresses of low-level GrafVerb routines - These routines, or
GrafProcs, are pointers to routines that implement GraNerb functionality.
• "Scratch" workspace variables - Used by QuickDraw while
accumulating open regions, polygons, and pictures.
The actual C GrafPort data structure definitions looks like Listing
2-20; the fields have been reordered to show groups of fields with
related functionality.
Listing 2-20. GrafPort data structure
typedef struct
{

..

..

short
Rect
BitMap
RgnHandle
RgnHandle

device;
portRect;
portBits;
visRgn;
clipRgn;

/*
private
*/
/* drawing boundary and */
/* destination information */

Pattern
Pattern

bkPat;
fillPat;

I* pen state information */

~

The GrafPort

Point
Point
short
Pattern
short

pnLoc ;
pnSize ;
pnMode ;
pnPat ;
pnVis ;

short
Style
short
short
long

txFont ;
txFace ;
txMode ;
txSize ;
spExtra ;

/* text state information */

long
long
short

fgColor ;
bkColor ;
colrBit ;

/ * color information ( "old style " ) */

short
QDHandle
QDHandle
QDHandle
QDProcsPtr

patStretch ; / *
picSave ;
rgnSave ;
polySave ;
grafProcs ;

71

private •• */

GrafPort, *GrafPtr;

As you can see, a GrafPort contains a wealth of control information.
As a general rule, GrafPort field values are maintained by the
QuickDraw traps and shouldn't be accessed directly by an application. With few exceptions, there are methods .provided for saving and
setting the states of each functional domain. In some cases, you will
need to read GrafPort field values, particularly for determining textdrawing states.
Note.,..

If there is a trap to access GrafPort fields, use it! Apple's ability to
maintain compatibility between your applications, future system
software, and hardware rely heavily on this guideline to the extent that you should consider it a rule of Macintosh software
development.

72

..,. Chapter 2

Important .,,.. I

Basic Drawing Technique and Theory

GrafPort information is treated by QuickDraw as its primary set
e>f "global information." Virtually all QuickDraw traps operate
within the curr{!nt GrafPort. At any given time within a single application, there may be several GrafPorts in existence, but QuickDraw

traps access environment data structures within the current GrafPort
only. This simple fact is extremely important and has numerous
ramifications for your Macintosh programming style and technique.
At a minimum, keeping track of the current GrafPort is essential.
Drawing into the wrong GrafPort often causes unpredictable
events, from the humorous {drawing in the wrong window or on
the desktop itself) to the deadly (crashing).
Listing 2-21 shows the use of the ever-popular SetPortO and GetPort()
traps in preserving the current GrafPort.
Listing 2-21. Preserving the current Graf Port
/*

**preserving the current GrafPort
*I
void DrawinSorneWindow(
WindowPtrtheWindow
GrafPtr

savedPort ;

GetPort( &savedPort ) ;
SetPort( (GrafPtr)theWi ndow ) ;
/ * do some drawing here */
SetPort( savedPort ) ;

...

Important JIJ>

The Graf Port

73

Notice that we're type-coercing the window reference to be a
Grafport reference instead. Why are we twisting the arm of the
compiler (at least one that checks prototypes!) in this fashion?
QuickDraw and many other Toolbox managers have traps that
take Ptr or Handle arguments whose permissible type may come
from a family of type rather than from a single type. A good example of this is that all of the Handle-based types discussed so
far can be "measured" via the Memory Manager's GetHandleSize()
trap. The type-checking facilites of C and Pascal cannot adequately
account for this multiplicity of permissible argument types in their
respective routine prototyping syntaxes, so the programmer is
left with three inferior solutions when using or developing such
routines:
• to type-coerce routine arguments on a call-by-call basis
• to declare the argument type to be "void*" (C) or "universal
ptr" (Pascal)
• to not prototype the routine at all (Conly)
The first of these is the path most often taken by developers and
development system interface files. You will encounter this data
typing "short-circuit" many times throughout your Macintosh
programming adventures. In particular, many of the color extensions to Classic QuickDraw presented in the next chapter rely
heavily on these techniques .

.,.. Boundaries and Coordinate Systems
Macintosh graphics are drawn (rendered) in Cartesian coordinate space,
better known as an X-Y plane. Unlike the coordinate space familiar to
high school algebra alumni, which starts in the center at (0, 0) and
increases as you move toward the upper-right corner, the QuickDraw
coordinate system starts with (0, 0) at the top-left corner of the screen,
moving down and to the right for increasing positive coordinates and
up and to the left for decreasing negative values. This is consistent
with common video-based displays, which draw from left to right, top
to bottom.

74

~

Chapter 2

Note ll>

Basic Drawing Technique and Theory

Interestingly enough, PostScript uses the algebraic coordinate system. Fortunately, the conversions between QuickDraw and PostScript coordinates are handled by print drivers and can be
ignored at the application level.
Every GrafPort has its own coordinate system, as shown in Figure 2-28.
{O, O) Global Coordinates
(-37, -73) Local Coordinates of "My Window"

s File Edit Uiew Special
My Window
41 2K in disk

356K av ail ab le

(37, 73) Global Coordinates
{O, 0) Local Coordinates of "My Window"

Note that values increase
moving to the right and
downward from the
origin-following the
movement of a screen's
scan line.

Figure 2-28. QuickDraw coordinate system

.,.. The GrafPort

75

The coordinate plane defines (or circumscribes) most QuickDraw
operations in these important ways:
• Its point coordinates are expressed as signed 16-bit integers in the
range -32,768 to 32,767. For most applications, this will be more
than enough area to draw in. The resolution of drawing operations can be adjusted for those applications that require a larger
coordinate space, such as scanners and CAD applications.
• It's the yardstick that we use to draw and measure. This means
questions like "how long is that line segment?" can be asked
when the segment's endpoints can be given as coordinate points.
At the same time, the "arbitrariness" of pixels and points as units
of measurements allows for a wide range of resolution interpretations to match drawing results to hardcopy devices.
• Its grid lines are Euclidian: They have no thickness. Drawn lines
of pixels have thickness. Recall the discussion of points and pixels
earlier in this chapter.
• It's used to define the boundaries beyond which drawing (changing of pixels) cannot occur. The concepts of visibility and clipping
are used to transparently limit the effects of drawing operations
to the desired destinations, which are usually only a portion of
the screen, window, or offscreen document image.
The GrafPort is only the first of four or five data structures that
define the graphics environment, as you will soon discover. But the
GrafPort is the most important one, if for one reason only: Windows
are based on GrafPorts. But more on that later.
~

Visible Area
The current visible area of a GrafPort (or port) is known as the visRgn,
or visible region. It defines the drawable boundary of the digital
"paper." Unlike paper, the drawing boundary can be resized as necessary; however, it's strongly recommended that applications refrain
from modifying the visRgn directly, and only in rare circumstances
should the application modify the visRgn through the port-resizing or
the region-calculation traps.
When a GrafPort (or port) belongs to a window, then its visRgn is
maintained by the Window Manager, which alters it to reflect the
changes in the visible portion of the window as it gets covered up by
other windows or uncovered by being brought to the front.

76

~

Chapter 2

Basic Drawing Technique and Theory

..,. Clipping
The visRgn's access restrictions seem substantial; the ability to clip, or
temporarily restrict the extent of drawing operation to a small portion
of the entire drawable area, is useful and often necessary. The reason
for the visRgn limitations is that the clipping capability is assigned to
the clipRgn, or clipping region. As with most GrafPort features, the
clipping region should be maintained and not just adjusted carelessly.
Listing 2-22 shows an example of using clipping to restrict drawing,
along with the appropriate clipRgn maintenance.
Listing 2-22. Example of clipped drawing
I*

**draw something with clipping,
**preserving the current clipping region
*/

void DrawSornethingClipped( void
{

RgnHandle
Re ct

savedClip, newClip;
thingR;

/* create an oval region to use for a new clipping area */
newClip = NewRgn();
OpenRgn();
SetRect( &thingR, 20, 20, 100, 80 );
FrarneOval( &thingR );
CloseRgn( newClip );
/* copy current clip region */
savedClip = NewRgn();
GetClip( savedClip );
/* draw the unclipped area */
OffsetRect( &thingR, 20, 20 ) ;
FillRect( &thingR, ltGray );
/* show the clipping area-to-be */
PenPat ( black ) ;
FrarneRgn( newClip );
/* set the clip region equal to the new oval region */
SetClip( newClip ) ;

/* blacken the area as allowed by the clip region */
FillRect( &thingR, black ) ;

..., The GrafPort

77

/* restore original clip region */
SetClip( savedClip );
DisposeRgn( savedClip );
/* finished with the region */
DisposeRgn( newclip ) ;

If DrawSomethingClipped() was called without its clipping code
present, it would produce a result similar to Figure 2-29.

Figure 2-29. Results of calling DrawSomethingClipped()

Without clipping, the filled rectangle would be drawn in its entirety.
Clipping is a powerful tool and will be visited again in Chapter 5.
~

Bottleneck Procedures
QuickDraw owes much of its flexibility to its separation of drawing
commands from the software that performs them. This separation is
implemented through the mechanism of bottleneck procedures. Bottlenecks are procedures that carry out the actual work associated with
GraNerbs and other QuickDraw drawing operations. A GrafPort stores
references to its bottleneck procedures in its qdProcsPtr field. This is a
pointer to a QDProcs structure, which is shown in Listing 2-23.
Listing 2-23. QDProcs data structure
typedef struct QDProcs
{

Ptr textProc;
Ptr lineProc;
Ptr rectProc;

78

..,. Chapter 2

Basic Drawing Technique and Theory

Ptr
Ptr
Ptr
Ptr
Ptr
Ptr
Ptr
Ptr
Ptr
Ptr

rRectProc;
ovalProc;
arcProc;
polyProc;
rgnProc;
bitsProc;
cornrnentProc;
txMeasProc;
getPicProc;
putPicProc;

QDProcs, *QDProcsPtr;

QuickDraw has a "standard" trap for each bottleneck procedure:
StdLine() is the trap that implements standard line drawing, StdRect()
is used to implement drawing of rectangles, and so forth. A GrafPort,
when opened, has a NULL qdGrafVars field, which QuickDraw understands to mean "use the standard bottleneck routines." A GrafPort's
bottleneck procedures may be accessed directly by reading or assigning the fields within the GrafPort's qdGrafVars field, or by calling the
SetStdProcs() trap to initialize a QDProcs record with pointers to the
standard bottleneck routines. An example of this technique is shown
in Listing 3-25 in the next chapter.
The beauty of bottlenecks may not be readily apparent, but the
flexibility afforded by bottlenecks is fundamental to the flexibility of
QuickDraw. Customized versions of the standard bottleneck procs are
installed in the current GrafPort when a page is open for printing.
This allows QuickDraw to transparently compensate for the differences between graphics display and the requirements of PostScript
and other page-description languages found on hardcopy devices.
Applications may also use their custom bottleneck procedures to
enhance QuickDraw functionality or simply to obtain more information about the graphic operations it performs. A custom bottleneck
may augment the standard bottleneck by calling it directly, either
before or after performing whatever operations are required of the
custom procedure .

...,. Summary
Understanding contemporary graphic interface designs and principles,
and how the Macintosh implements them, is fundamental to simple
and successful programming. This chapter presented basic shapedrawing concepts, along with the standard Macintosh terminology.

.,.. Summary

79

GrafVerbs were discussed as the implementation and theoretical foundation for basic shape-drawing operations. Rects and regions were
introduced as the means to define boundaries for drawing operations
and calculations. Other graphics primitives, such as line drawing and
basic text display, were also discussed. The chapter also presented the
GrafPort data type as the container for basic graphic environment
state variables that determine the results of graphic operations. Finally, bottleneck procedures were discussed as the device-independent implementation for all standard QuickDraw graphics functionality.
Many of the subjects in this chapter are discussed in the QuickDraw
chapter of Inside Macintosh, Volume I. If you haven't read it already,
you should consider doing so soon.

3

Drawing in Color

In Chapter 2, basic QuickDraw concepts and technique were discussed, limited to the world of monochrome drawing: black "ink" on
white "paper." To those drawing and calculation constructs, we can
now add color, without invalidating the techniques learned in the last
chapter. With the introduction of Color QuickDraw, Classic QuickDraw's black-or-white-only "pen" is augmented by a whole new box
of colored crayons.
But color graphics programming involves much more than selecting
from an expanded range of pen colors: It also involves significant
conceptual understanding and programming effort. The concepts and
tools necessary for full-featured color graphics programming may be
new, even to experienced programmers.
This chapter integrates the theoretical constructs needed to define
graphics functionality with the software tools available to the Macintosh programmer in the form of Toolbox managers. The discussion
starts with a quick introduction to color description theory. The discussion then moves to the organization of Color QuickDraw and the
basics of Macintosh color graphics programming: The key data structures, trap calls, algorithms, and places where Classic QuickDraw has
been changed to accommodate color are all discussed in detail.

81

82

~

Chapter 3

Drawing in Color

..._ Software Components of Color
In order to facilitate color display, QuickDraw's implementation and
design had to be changed: Many new features and concepts were
added, and a few old ones had to be modified. The rationale for this
reorganization is as follows:
• Descriptive power - The conception of a graphics environment
as defined by a single data structure, the GrafPort, has been
replaced by a number of data structures.
• Resource management - Color display hardware resources require substantially more complex and comprehensive management strategies than its monochrome counterparts.
• Greater systemwide management role - The data structures that
constitute the interface between graphics operations and display
monitors are generally maintained by the application; however,
many of the data structures associated with the color characteristics
of display monitors are maintained by new Toolbox managers.
~

Graphics Toolbox Organization
When the Macintosh was introduced in 1984, its graphics functionality was limited to the following features:
• Basic drawing - Basic data structures (Points, Rectangles, Regions); boundaries and coordinate systems (clipping and visible
regions); shapes (lines, rectangles, ovals, rounded rectangles, polygons, regions, arcs); pens and pen attributes (size, location, pattern, transfer mode); text and text attributes (font, size, style,
transfer mode); and pixel memory (bitmapped display memory:
one bit per pixel).
• Windows and user interface - Onscreen graphics display shared
between applications management of boundaries between overlapping windows support simple controls.
• Printing - Basic user printing dialogs.
These graphics features were distributed among various Toolbox
managers, as shown in Figure 3-1.

..,. Software Components of Color

Higher-level
managers

Dialogs

Menus

TextEdit

OuickDraw

Font
manager

Lower-level
managers

Memory
manage r

Video

RAM

Mother
board

RAM

Figure 3-1 . Classic QuickDraw functional organization

83

84

~

Chapter 3 Drawing in Color

As you can see, most of the basic graphics functionality is located in
the QuickDraw module, with well-defined linkages to a small number
of lower-level support managers. When the Macintosh II family was
introduced in 1987, QuickDraw was expanded to handle color and
multiple monitors, resulting in the following organization of features:
• Basic drawing - Color QuickDraw (support for multiple bits per
screen pixel, extended CopyBits functionality, multi-bit versions
of Classic QuickDraw data structures, multi-bit versions of
GraNerb traps, new color transfer modes);
• Color and pixels - Color representation (indexed and direct color
models, control of pixel value to color translation) and color
selection (colorspaces: RGB, CMY, HSL, HSV, index space, others);
• Video display control - Definitions of Graphics Devices and
color models (support for indexed and direct color models, control of pixel value to color translation, and device driver control
of graphics hardware;
• Support for multiple display monitors;
• Windows and user interface - Color Toolbox (color extensions
for user interface managers: windows, menus, controls, dialogs);
and
• Printing - Extensions to standard Print Dialogs.
Since the introduction of the Macintosh II line, there have been two
other major releases of QuickDraw. Each major release has incorporated
significant improvements to existing QuickDraw facilities, as well as the
introduction of new features. Figure 3-2 shows the revised organization
of graphics functionality. An overview of the four major QuickDraw
releases is as follows:
• Classic QuickDraw, first released January, 1984 - As discussed
at length in the previous chapter, Classic QuickDraw provides
basic shape drawing and calculation traps. It supports monochrome (or more precisely, two-color) drawing only: 1 bit per
screen pixel (see Inside Macintosh, Volume I).
• Color QuickDraw, first released March, 1987 - This version adds
color capabilities to Classic QuickDraw. It supports multi-color

.,.. Software Components of Color

User

Color
Picker
Package

Application

l

Monitors

Graphics
Device
Manager
(GWorlds)

Color
QuickDraw

Palette
Manager

Color
Manager
Graphics
Device
Manager
(other)

Picture
Utilities

Higher-level
managers

Lower-level
managers

Slot
Manager

Video Display
Device Driver

Nu Bus

~

Video display

~ ...__ _
co_n_tr_o_I_ ___. i----1

Video display card

Figure 3-2. Macintosh II QuickDraw functional organization

85

86

llJJ.

Chapter 3 Drawing in Color

drawing, using multiple bits per pixel, and introduces expanded
versions of certain Classic QuickDraw data structures, particularly the BitMap, Pattern, and GrafPort, which become the PixMap,
PixPat, and CGrafPort, respectively. In addition, the existing
QuickDraw traps will draw in pen colors other than black and
white (see Inside Macintosh, Volume V).
• 32-bit QuickDraw, first released May, 1989 - This version introduces the concept of true color, where color specification is as
good or greater than what the human eye can perceive. The
implementation of true color includes 16- and 32-bit pixels and
other "direct" data structures capable of holding more color information than their 8-bit predecessors. Other important 32-bit
QuickDraw features include an improved Palette Manager and a
reliable and comprehensive offscreen imaging library known as
GWorlds, as well as more high-level software access to common
display hardware features (see Inside Macintosh, Volume VI).
• System 7 QuickDraw, first released May, 1991 - This version of
QuickDraw unifies Classic, Color, and 32-bit QuickDraw. All
Color QuickDraw traps and data structures previously unavailable under Classic QuickDraw are implemented, freeing developers from having to implement separate drawing routines for Classic
and Color environments. GWorlds are implemented under System 7 Classic QuickDraw. Additionally, a number of new routines
and managers are included in this release (see Inside Macintosh,
Volume VI).
Each major QuickDraw release has seen the introduction of new
traps and/ or entire managers. Briefly, these new graphics managers
perform the following duties:
• Slot Manager - The Slot Manager manages the initialization of
graphics display cards on the NuBus, as well as supporting the
transfer of image data and control information between display
cards and motherboard memory (see Inside Macintosh, Volumes V
and VI, and Designing Cards and Drivers, Second Edition).
• Graphics Device Manager - The Graphics Device Manager describes the relationships between pixel memory values and visual
display characteristics. It supports multiple display monitors and
provides access to standard and specialized graphics display hardware features, particularly display color mapping and pixel depth

~

Software Components of Color

87

control (see Inside Macintosh, Volumes V and VI, and Designing
Cards and Drivers, Second Edition) .
• Color Manager - This manager really should be named the Color
Mapping Manager. Its primary role is to make determinations of
color mapping, the process of matching color values stored in
QuickDraw data structures to those currently available on the
current graphics device (see Inside Macintosh, Volume V, although
the chapter is sketchy).
• Palette Manager - This manager arbitrates requests for displayable
colors on a per window basis across all active applications. Working with the Window Manager, it determines which colors are
available to each window at any given moment, making the
necessary Color Manager trap calls to update the affected display
devices (see Inside Macintosh , Volumes V and VI).
• Color Picker - This package implements a simple dialog interface for color selection on any display monitor, even on monochrome displays. It also provides a family of utility traps to
facilitate simple value conversions between standard color description systems, or colorspaces (see Inside Macintosh, Volume V) .
• Picture Utilities - This package, introduced with System 7.0,
allows applications to analyze and gather statistics on the shape,
text, and color operations that contained in pictures. It also provides color and histogram analysis functions on pixel images (see
Inside Macintosh, Volume VI).
Like many aspects of the Macintosh, color graphics support involves
a number of interrelated concepts, which serves to complicate discussions about the various subtopics.
Aside..,.

Throughout the book you will find us referring to these managers
collectively as the Macintosh Graphics Toolbox or even just QuickDraw; this is because many functional components are so tightly
interrelated and similar that distinctions between them are almost
academic. The functionality of each manager will be addressed in
detail, but it's important to recognize each one as an integral part
of a larger graphics package.

88

..,.. Chapter 3 Drawing in Color

In general, the new Color Managers interact with data structures
differently than Classic QuickDraw. The following aspects are particularly noteworthy:
• Memory management - Most important data structures need to
be resized dynamically and consequently are Handle-based.
Greater care must be taken to ensure that variables of these data
types are created properly and disposed of reliably.
• Nested structures - The number and depth of data structure
nesting is greater, particularly with important Handle-based data
types. This adds to the application's memory management responsibilities.
• NULL pointer references - On the good side, the new color
traps recognize NULL Ptr and Handle arguments, either by reporting them as errors and exiting without processing, or by
treating them as a special value.
• Error reporting - Most of the newer traps report errors encountered during their computations indirectly through the QDError()
trap. Additionally, some Classic traps now register their failures
with this trap. Most of these errors are a result of insufficient heap
memory or an inability of the graphics hardware to provide the
requested graphics service.
~

Multi-Bit Pixels
The Classic Macintosh family machines, with their black-and-white
monitors, have pixels that are either black or white. The informational
content of such a pixel can be represented with a single bit of RAM.
We use the terms pixel value mapping and color mapping to refer to the
translation of pixel values in memory into visible, displayable quantities. The Classic Macintosh value mapping is quite simple: If a bit
holds a one, then the corresponding pixel is black, or filled; if the bit
holds a zero, the pixel is white, or blank. Mathematically speaking,
value mapping is arbitrary. The black-one, white-zero mapping was
chosen by Apple simply because of its similarity to the "real world" of
pencil and paper. If you can remember back to 1983 when Apple
released the Lisa, most other computer systems chose the reverse
mapping: one for white, zero for black.
Multi-bit pixels are necessary for drawing in more than two colors.
In a color system, pixel values must represent more than two different
colors and therefore must occupy more than 1 bit of memory.

~

Color Models

89

Suppose that a pixel's size (or depth) is increased from 1 to 2 bits.
This pixel can now assume any one of four possible values, twice as
many as before. Each value can theoretically represent a distinct color.
As with integer value representations, the number of possible colors
represented by a given pixel depth is
number of different colors= 2<numberofbitsperpixel)
Color QuickDraw facilitates 1-, 2-, 4-, or 8-bit pixels; 32-bit QuickDraw
adds 16- and 32-bit pixel depths. The most common pixel depth, or
size, is 8 bits, which allows each pixel to select from 28, or 256 possible
colors .

..._ Color Models
We've mentioned the increased information-carrying capacity of multibit pixels without regard to how those pixel values are translated into
displayable colors. There are a number of methods for performing this
translation, each of them requiring a particular configuration of pixel
data in memory. We refer to these methods as color models.
Color, 32-bit, and System 7 QuickDraw together support four distinct color models: classic, fixed, indexed, and direct. Of these, the indexed and direct models are most important: They represent two
different ways of interpreting pixel values as color information. The
primary difference between these two models is the number of simultaneously displayable colors allowed: The indexed model is used for
pixel depths of 1, 2, 4, and 8 bits per pixel; the direct model supports pixel
depths of 16 and 32 bits .

.,.. Indexed Color
In an indexed color model, each pixel value serves as an index (or
lookup) into a table that holds the actual RGB color information. The
ColorTable therefore defines the pixel's color; without it, an indexed
pixel value doesn't describe any color at all. The relationship between
different indexed pixel values may or may not be arbitrary. Adjacent
pixel values may reference color values that are dramatically different
or extremely similar.
An advantage of the indexed model is that the relationship between
pixel and color values can be changed simply by altering the ColorTable' s color values. The indexed color model has a few other names;

90

Ill>

Chapter 3 Drawing in Color

it's sometimes called the CLUT (Color LookUp Table) color model, or the
mapped color model.
There are many applications where the indexed model doesn't provide enough color specification. For example, a photograph of a forest
might have a few hundred shades of green; the 256-color limitation of
an 8-bit representation causes such images to lose some shades of
color, making the picture look blotchy and unreal.

..,.. Direct Color
With the advent of Color QuickDraw Version 1.0, a new pixel valueto-color representation, called the direct color model, was introduced
whereby pixel values contain actual RGB color information rather
than ColorTable index values. Direct pixels are called "direct" because
their values can be directly interpreted as RGB color information
without the "indirection" of a CLUT transformation. Direct pixels
contain 24 bits of color information in 32-bit pixels, and 15 bits of
color information in 16-bit pixels. The differences between the pixel
value representations in indexed and direct devices are shown in
Figure 3-3.
Note that in Figure 3-3, both an index value and a direct value can
be used to produce the same color (represented by the 48-bit RGB
value). The main difference is that an index value relies on the CLUT
to store the actual value.
Direct pixel images can coexist in an application's heap with indexed images, but each individual image must be entirely composed
of one kind of pixel. Each color model has its advantages and drawbacks: The trade-offs between them will become clear as you read on.
It's up to you to choose either indexed or direct pixels for your
application's graphics requirements.

~

Color Models

Indexed Pixel

11111111
Color Lookup Table (CLUT)

R
Pixel
value
is 2

R

G

B

Direct Pixel Value

Unused

R

Figure 3-3. Indexed versus direct color interpretation

91

92

~

Chapter 3 Drawing in Color

.,... Fixed Color
The fixed model is essentially the same as the indexed model, except
that a fixed GDevice' s ColorTable cannot be changed. Its design is
intended to represent hardcopy devices where the available colors
cannot be changed. This model combines elements of both indexed
and fixed models. Due to the relative lack of popularity among Macintosh hardware offerings, we will not describe the fixed model in
further detail.

.,... Classic Color
The Classic model is the color model used by the Classic Macintosh
family. This model is quite similar to the fixed model and has eight
constant color choices. Yes, it's true: The Classic black-and-white
Macintoshes can draw in color to a limited degree - it's just that no
one could see the colors on their monochrome screens. The Classic
color model has limited support for bit-plane-oriented output to
hardcopy devices.
The Classic color model is supported under Color QuickDraw within
both the indexed and direct color models. With respect to color selection, its functionality is quite limited, compared to the indexed and
direct color models. Despite its limitations, however, the Classic color
model is ideal for applications that require a limited number of fixed
color choices.
Why are there all these color models? Most of the reason lies in the
fact that graphics hardware architectures have been evolving, and that
software color models have been created to match the hardware. Pixel
image organization is a reflection of the raster-scan orientation of
display hardware architecture. The indexed and direct pixel models
reflect two different strategies in graphics display hardware. The most
common type of display hardware currently in use employs indexed
color; the monitor can display a limited number of colors simultaneously. The colors available for display are stored on the display
card, and can be changed to match the colors of the image to be
displayed. Direct display devices can display an essentially unlimited
number of colors simultaneously within a color range, or gamut, but
they're more technologically complex and therefore more expensive.
The graphics display market is quite competitive, and as a consequence, 16- and 24-bit direct display controllers will become more
affordable and find their way into more and more machines.

.,.. Basic Color Theory

~

93

Basic Color Theory
The color theory presented in this section is straightforward and includes
frequent references to the Macintosh programming paradigm. We've
included it to establish a common ground for the discussions of the
various color programming data structures and tools that follow. A
detailed discussion of the physics and physiology of color perception
is beyond the scope of this book; there are many good sources of
information on these fascinating topics, some of which you can find in
the Bibliography.

~

RGB Color
Color is a matter of perception. Light energy (electromagnetic radiation) falling on your retina excites your eyes' light-sensitive color
receptors, which send information to your brain via your optic nerve;
this stimulus is perceived as color.
There are three components of visual color:
• Hue - This is what appears to us as "pure" color. Hues run from
red at one end to violet at the other. A rainbow is a sequence of
bright hues starting from low (red) values to high (purple) values.
Hue is also referred to as chroma.
• Saturation - This refers to the amount of hue in the color. Less
saturated colors are "whiter" than those that are heavily saturated. For example, pink is a red of low saturation.
• Brightness - Brightness is similar to saturation, except that it
denotes the amount of black or gray in the color. For example, a
dark red may be as saturated as a bright red.
For better or worse, color display monitors use an entirely different
color paradigm for defining color values: the RGB color model. The basic
RGB technique can be directly observed by placing a magnifying glass
on a color TV set or color monitor. You should be able to see that each
screen pixel is actually composed of three closely arranged spots or
stripes. The three pixel spots, or components, are red, green, and blue.
A wide range of colors can be achieved by mixing these three colors.
When two light sources are geographically so close together that the
limits of your visual acuity cause you to see them as only one source,
then the colors of the emitted sources are blended and perceived as a
single color that is different from either of the original two sources.

94

.,.. Chapter 3 Drawing in Color

Note.,..

In the graphics display world, the combination of colors yields a
color that is brighter than any of the original colors; that is, the sum
of color mixing tends toward white light. This is known as additive color. In the w rid of paints, inks, and pigments, color mixing
tend toward black. This is known as subtractive color. Co1or QuickDraw provides both additive and subtractive color mixing
OP.erations.

IJJJ.

Chromaticity and Primary Colors
Figure 3-4 is a black-and-white representation of the CIE Chromaticity
Diagram. Inside the wing-shaped area between the axes are all the
colors (hues) visible to the human eye, disregarding differences in
light intensity. The visible colors vary continuously throughout the
region with the greenish hues at the tip of the wing, the blues on the
lower left, the reds on the right, and white in the middle surrounded
by the pastels. See CP-1 on the color plate for a color representation of
the chart.

y
0.9

520

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

700

0.2
0.1
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8

Figure 3-4. CIE chromaticity diagram

~

Basic Color Theory

95

The chromaticity diagram is useful to us because it describes the
mixing of colors. If you choose two colors - two points on the
chromaticity diagram - then the colors that can be achieved by
mixing them are the points on the line segment that you can draw
from one point to the other. Take, for example, the two colors at RED.1
and WHITE 2 shown in Figure 3-5.

Green

Yellow

White2
Red 1
Red

~
.Jll""''-+---i

,--<1

Figure 3-5. Example of color chromaticity and mixing
These colors can be combined to create any of the hues on the line
between them. The result of combining them depends on the relative
intensities of the two colors. If you mix in more red than white, the
result lies closer to RED 1 than WHITE 2. This result is true no matter
which two colors are used as primary colors. If a third primary color
is used for mixing, like BLUE 3, then the result of mixing all three
colors lies along the line between BLUE 3 and the point that was the

96

..,,. Chapter 3 Drawing in Color

result of mixing the first two primaries. In this example, the result is a
color in the violet range. The resulting colors depend on two factors:
the choice of primary colors and the relative intensities of those primary colors. The gamut of colors available as a result of mixing three
primary colors are those colors at the points inside the triangle created
by drawing line segments between the three primary colors.
Two important color mixing concepts are illustrated by the chromaticity diagram:
• The choice of primary colors is arbitrary. Color mixing can be
accomplished using any colors in the diagram. Four or nine primary colors could be used instead of three. Because the area of
visible chromaticity is roughly triangular, three primary colors are
sufficient to provide a broad gamut of available colors - again,
refer to Figure 3-5. It's equally easy to decide that red, green, and
blue are good candidates as primary colors, simply because their
locations in the visible area defines a triangle that covers the
largest possible area of chromaticity. In subtractive color environments, the primary color choices are cyan, magenta, and yellow,
all of which are relatively brighter than their RGB counterparts.
Many of us were taught early on that the primary colors are red,
yellow, and blue. These are reasonably good choices, but they
define a much narrower range of displayable colors that can be
achieved through color mixing, simply because green is closer
than yellow to the highest, centermost chromaticity point. Again,
the term "primary" is somewhat arbitrary. For practical reasons,
the computer world has chosen red, green, and blue for primary
colors, and it isn't likely to change anytime soon!
• Because of the shape of color space as represented by the chromaticity diagram, choosing a tri-color primary system for mixing
colors means that there are visible colors that can't be created by
mixing the three primaries. In Figure 3-5, any color inside the
triangle can be created from some proportional mixture of the
primary colors, but all colors outside the triangle cannot be created by any combination of the three primaries. In fact, no three
colors can be selected from the visible colors and then used as tricolor primaries to map all of the visible colors.

.,. Basic Color Theory

97

.,... RGB Color Values
The RGBColor data structure is used by Color QuickDraw to describe
RGB color values and is shown in Listing 3-1.
Listing 3- 1. RGBColor data structure
typedef struct
{

SmallFract red;
SmallFract green;
SmallFract blue;
RGBColor;

An RGBColor variable specifies a color by describing the amounts of
each component in the color. The SmallFract type is a 16-bit unsigned
quantity that represents a fixed-point decimal value between 0 and
255 + 25%s6, in increments of Y256. A SmallFract can also be thought of as
a 16-bit unsigned integer ranging from 0 to 65535, as shown graphically in Figure 3-6.
0-65,535

~~=~ge~ed

21s 214 213 212 211 210 2s 2a 21 2s 2s 24 23 i 21 2o

=38,494

I 1I ol ol 1Iol1I1 I ol ol 1Iol1I1I1I1 I ol
=150 + 94/256
=150.3671875

0-255

1/256-255/256

Figure 3-6. SmallFract and unsigned integer value ranges

Because the RGB color system has three components for each color,
we can use a three-dimensional model to explore some properties of
Color QuickDraw' s displayable colors. To help you visualize the gamut
of displayable colors, let's introduce a popular color abstraction, the
RGB color cube, as shown in Figure 3-7.
The color cube is a representation of a color space in which three
orthogonal axes measure the three color components (red, green, and
blue) as nonnegative real numbers. At any point within the cube, the

98

~

Chapter 3 Drawing in Color

Cyan
(0, 65535, 66535)

Blue
(0,0,65535)

Green
(0, 655355, 0)

Magenta
(65535, 0, 65535)

Yellow
(65535, 65535, 0)

Red
(65535, 0, 0)

Figure 3-7. RGB color cube

color of the point is the result of combining red as measured on the R
axis, green on the G axis, and blue on the B axis. Black is at the corner
of the cube where RGB = (0, 0, O); in other words no red, no green, and
no blue - the absence of light. White is the color at the diagonally
opposite corner of the cube. But what are the RGB coordinates of
white? Black was intuitive: no light, black. But how much red, green,
and blue does it take to make white? The answer is, enough. It takes
enough electromagnetic radiation composed of equal parts of red,
green, and blue wavelengths to make your brain perceive white; more
than that just makes you squint. Similarly, black isn't really an absence
of light (there's always some light either being reflected or emitted),
it's just a level of light composed of equal parts red, green, and blue
that is so low that your brain perceives blackness.
The manufacturer of a graphics display monitor defines the absolute
range of colors that its devices can display. QuickDraw maps the
available range of displayable colors (whatever that may be) into the
range of integer values from 0 to 65535 for each of red, green, and
blue. A range of 65536 different shades of red is far more than any eye
can distinguish and more than most electronic devices can discern;
256 different reds are plenty. For this reason, 24-bit color is sometimes
called true color.

liJJ.

Basic Color Theory

99

The RGB color cube that describes the colors available on the Macintosh is granular because the numbers on the R, G, and B axes are
integers; in other words, there are points on the R axis at 0, 1, 2, 3, and
so on, but not at 1.5 or 2.83. The cube itself is made up of 224 discrete,
different colors (although adjacent colors don't differ by much) .

I By the Way ~ I

A word about the term color. In this discussion, all combinations
of red, green, and blue are referred to as "colo:ts" even though black,
white, and all shades of gray are included. Gray is defined as a,ny
color whose red, green, and blue components are equal. For example, white is defined as RGB = (65535, 65535, 65535) and black,
not surprisirtgly, is RGB = (0, 0, 0). In the RGB color cube, the range
of grays are those colors on the diagonal line from black (0, 0, 0)
to white (65535, 65535, 65535), where all points satisfy the equation R = G = B.

..,_ Limits of Color Display
The actual range of displayable colors is further limited by the architecture of the graphics display control hardware on the card that
drives the monitor. The value of each component gets translated into a
voltage that is applied to the corresponding color gun in the monitor.
Realize that the simultaneous display of 16.8 million colors would
require a 4096-by-4096-pixel monitor!
These are two basic distinctions between direct and indexed graphics devices:
• Direct color means more colors at once - A 24-bit direct display
controller doesn't have the indexed controller's restrictions on the
number of colors displayed: A pixel displayed on a 24-bit direct
display can have any value in RGB colorspace, regardless of any
other displayed pixel's value. This offers a lot more variability in
building a picture for display. A monitor controlled by a direct
display card has the same range of displayable color values as an
indexed display controller: It has the same restrictions imposed
by the choice of primary colors used by the monitor, and it
doesn't have any greater resolution within the gamut of displayable
colors. In addition, it uses the same 24 bits of precision in memory
while simultaneously displaying a wider range of colors.

100

Iii>-

Chapter 3 Drawing in Color

• Indexed color means more accurate color - The range of
displayable RGB colors, or colorspace, is precisely the number of
possible combinations of the significant component values, which
can be determined for a 24-bit pixel image as follows:
number of displayable colors

= 2(number of bits per pixel value component)(number of components)
= 2(8x3)

= 224
= 16777216 = 16.8 million (approximately)
Surprisingly, this calculation yields a different result for indexed
pixel images, since those values are determined by the resolution
of the CLUT's ColorSpec entries (48 bits) and not the pixel values
themselves (16 or 24 bits).
number of displayable colors

= 2(number of bits per CLUT entry component)(number of components)
= 2(16x3)
= 248
= 16777216 x 16777216 = <a really big number!>

..,,. Color Picker
Although RGB color is Color QuickDraw' s standard color currency,
there are other ways of describing colors. The Color Picker is a package-based manager that contains a number of colorspace conversion
traps. The Color Picker also includes a dialog-based color selection
interface that presents a comprehensive yet intuitive means of selecting color values in RGB and hue-based colorspaces.

-.. Color Picker Dialog
The color selection dialog is accessible from a single trap, GetColor().
Its interface is as follows:
Boolean GetColor(
Point
where,
char
*prornptString,
RGBColor *inColor,
RGBColor *outColor );

This trap displays the dialog box shown in Figure 3-8.

Color Picker

1111>

1.5

Rrithmetic weighting color

Hue ·~o III

Saturation

III

O

Brightness 65535

III

Red 65535

III

Green 65535

III

Blue 65535

III

( Cancel ) (

OK

J

Version on color computers

1.5

Rrithmetic weighting color

§ 0 III

Hue
Saturation O

III

Brightness O

III

Red§III
Green O
III
Blue O

III

( Cancel J (

OK

Version on black and white computers

Figure 3-8. Color picker dialog

J

101

102

..,. Chapter 3

Drawing in Color

Using this dialog, often called the Color Picker itself, is fairly simple.
The trap returns TRUE if the user exited via the dialog's OK button,
and FALSE if the Cancel button was hit. There are a few details about
GetColor() that are worthy of consideration:
• The "where" argument can accept two special values that select a
special positioning of the dialog window. Passing the value (0, 0)
will cause the dialog to be centered as before, but on the main
screen. Under 32-bit QuickDraw, the value (-1, -1) directs GetColor()
to place the dialog on the "best" monitor, centered horizontally
and a third of the way down from the top of the display.
• In all versions of the Color Picker available up to System 6.0.5, an
"OK" exit from the dialog will cause the GDevice' s ColorTable
ctSeed value to change. (ctSeed is discussed later in this chapter.)
Apple's Tech Note #120 suggested that checking this value was a
reliable means of determining a change in the GDevice' s ColorTable. There is a temporary change in the ColorTable, but it's
restored as soon as the dialog is removed from the screen. A
"Cancel" response doesn't cause a ctSeed change.
• The Color Picker dialog box is huge, covering a large portion of a
640-by-480-pixel monitor. It's also modal and requires the user to
make a number of adjustments in order to specify the desired
color value. You may want to implement a smaller, simpler
modeless color selection interface with a scrollbar or slider to
adjust each individual colorspace component value. An example
of such an interface is shown in Figure 3-9.

Select a color:

I1•5535
Hue

saturation 1¢ liii::mmmum:mm:O ¢1
165535

I

~

Brightness 1¢ lii!!ii!i!i!i!!ii!!!im!i!i!i!Q ¢1
165535

I

~

( Cancel )
\li;;;;(

_.o_.K~D

Figure 3-9. Custom color selection window

~

Color Picker

103

""' HSV Colorspace
One such alternative to the RGB colorspace is the HSL colorspace,
which stands for hue, saturation, and lightness. Lightness is also
known as brightness or value. As discussed earlier, this colorspace
aptly describes the human perception of color. The Color Picker package provides two traps, RGB2HSV() and HSV2RGB(), to translate
values between RGB and HSV color spaces. The formulas for these
conversions are laborous and not that remarkable. Using the conversion traps is highly recommended.
An interesting use of the HSV colorspace is to generate rainbows.
An example of this capability is shown in Listing 3-2, which demonstrates how to construct a "rainbow" array of RGBColor values.
Listing 3-2. Building a "rainbow" array of colors
#define MaxSmallFract

(SmallFract)OxFFFF

void MakeRainbowArray(
RGBColor *theColors,
short
entryCount
HSVColor theHSVColor;
Fixed
entryRatio;
short
i;
theHSVColor.saturation = MaxSmallFract;
theHSVColor.value = MaxSmallFract;
for (i=O; i<=entryCount; i++)
{

theHSVColor.hue = Fix2Smal1Fract(
FixRatio ( i, entryCount ) ) ;
HSV2RGB( &theHSVColor, &(theColors[i]) ) ;

Listing 3-2 operates upon an array of RGBColors. The common way
of maintaining a list of RGB values is through the use of the ColorTable
data structure, which is discussed later in this chapter.

104

~

Chapter 3

Drawing in Color

.,.. CMY Colorspace
Another standard colorspace is the cyan-magenta-yellow (CMY) colorspace. CMY space is simply the inverse of RGB space: CMY color values
can be obtained by bit-complementing RGB values: R = C'; G = M';
B = Y'. For example:
RGB( 45877, 699, 11004 )

= CMY( 45877', 699', 11004' )
= CMY( 19658, 64836, 54531 )
This colorspace is quite often used when performing subtractive
color operations. Color separations are a critical part of pre-press
image production and other high-end desktop publishing applications .

...,. ColorTables
It's often necessary to maintain lists of RGBColor values. In the
QuickDraw environment, such a list is called a ColorTable. Each list
item, or entry, is composed of an RGBColor value and an optional
index value. QuickDraw expresses a ColorTable with the data types,
as shown in Listing 3-3.
Listing 3-3. ColorSpec and ColorTable data structures
typedef struct
{

short
value;
RGBColor rgb;
ColorSpec;
typedef ColorSpec CSpecArray[l];
typedef struct
{

long
short
short
CSpecArray

ct Seed;
ctFlags;
ct Size;
ctTable;

ColorTable, *CTabPtr, **CTabHandle;

..,. ColorTables

105

As suggested by these data structure definitions, a ColorTable is a
dynamically sizable array and is typically managed through CTabHandles.
The fields of a ColorTable are used in the following manner:

• ctSeed - This field holds a unique identifier, which is used by
various Color Manager traps to establish a ColorTable' s identity.
QuickDraw considers ColorTables with matching ctSeed values to be
identical, regardless of any other data values that they may contain.
This value can also be used to identify a number of standard
ColorTables defined by the System; these ColorTables are described in Chapter 4.
• ctSize - This field indicates how many entries are in a ColorTable,
and effectively indicates the size in memory of remaining
ColorTable data, since each ColorSpec entry is of a fixed length (8
bytes). The value of this field is one less than the actual number of
entries.
• ctFlags - This field is treated as a set of bit flags and is used to
determine the exact meaning of each color entry in the table. The
usage of this field is discussed in Chapter 4.
• ctTable - The ctTable is the list of entries in the ColorTable. When
a ColorTable is attached to a GDevice, the value field in each
ColorSpec entry is reserved by the Color Manager to store the
usages for a given entry. GDevices are discussed in detail later in
this chapter.
A ColorTable entry's RGB value may be directly accessed by applications, provided that the application created that ColorTable. Some
ColorTables are the "private property" of Toolbox managers and should
only be accessed indirectly via specialized traps. The menubar's ColorTable is a good example of a private ColorTable. Specialized ColorTables
usually place a special meaning for each entry. For example, a control's
first ColorTable entry denotes the text color; the last entry denotes its
frame color.
The ColorTable is an important data type. It's included by many
other QuickDraw data structures, the most common of which is the
description of the colors to be used for indexed pixel values.
ColorTables are also used by other Toolbox managers to hold lists of
colors used for specialized purposes, many of which are discussed in
Chapter 4.

106

..,. Chapter 3 Drawing in Color

~

Graphic Devices
Apple introduced the concept of a graphics device (or GDevice) in order
to accommodate different graphics display architectures with a minimum of software specialization. A graphics device is a pseudo-device;
that is, it is a software representation of a hardware graphics device.

Important IJJ>

The intent of Graphics Devices is often misunderstood and has been
the cause of mucli confusion and wasted efforts among programmers. There are tWo factors that contribute heavily to this confusion:

• High levH of abstra:ction - The GDeviceis a high-level, abstract
concept. It's intended to embody and define a large number of
important graphical concepts: pixel memory organization, color
.mapping, device-driver-based hardware control, and so forth.
• Lack of concise documentation - The Graphics Devices chapter in Inside Macintosh, Volume V, is uncharacteristically vague
and does little to convey the theoretical understanding or implementation details of GDevices. In particular, the relationship
between the Graphics Device and Color Managers isn't well
dorur.n-.ted. The second edition of Designing Card and Device
Drivers for the Macintosh Family :Ras a number of useful sections
on GDevice programming, but this text is not well known to
most pi:ogrammers.
Clarifying this confusion won't be easy, so try to be as thorough
.aJ.l.d patient as you can while reading this section.
From a technical perspective, GDevices perform the following services:
• Define basic pixel attributes - The GDevice determines which
color model (indexed or direct) is used. It further determines the
number of bits per pixel, the horizontal and vertical resolution,
and colors currently available to the application. If a GDevice
belongs to a display monitor or hardcopy graphics device, it
contains a reference to the physical pixel image memory.
• Facilitate color mapping - A GDevice defines which colors are
available for display and imaging purposes. It's possible that
graphics data structures may contain color values that cannot be
represented by a GDevice; in such cases, that GDevice contains

..,. Graphic Devices

107

information used to determine how those values are translated
into ones that are valid within that GDevice. A most obvious
example of color mapping is the display of color pictures on a
grayscale monitor. The actual determinations of color mapping
are made by the Color and Palette managers.
• Determine software control access - A GDevice that is associated
with a physical display or hardcopy hardware device can accommodate direct hardware access through an associated low-level
device driver and provides QuickDraw drawing traps with the
necessary addressing information ..to access VRAM (video RAM)
directly. This allows graphics hardware manufacturers to implement the specific low-level video control functionality while allowing QuickDraw to function independently of graphics display
hardware architecture.
In short, GDevices play an important role in describing capabilities
of the available imaging hardware to applications and other managers
in the Graphics Toolbox.
lill- Using the Graphics Device Manager
A graphics device is defined by the GDevice data structure shown in
Listing 3-4.
Listing 3-4. GDevice data structure
typedef struct
{

short
short
short
ITabHandle
short
SProcHndl
CProcHndl
short
PixMapHandle
long
GDevice
Re ct
long
short
short

gdRefNurn;
gdID;
gdType;
gdITable;
gdResPref;
gdSearchProc;
gdCornpProc;
gdFlags;
gdPMap;
gdRefCon;
**gdNextGD;
gdRect;
gdMode;
gdCCBytes;
gdCCDepth;

108

lill>

Chapter 3

Drawing in Color

Handle
Handle
long

gdCCXData;
gdCCXMask;
gdReserved;

GDevice, *GDPtr, **GDHandle;

Most of these fields are managed by various traps and shouldn't be
accessed directly by application code. The following fields are of
particular importance to applications and must be assigned directly
on creation of a GDevice:

• gdPMap - This field holds the PixMap that defines many of the
GDevice's attributes. The PixMap's ColorTable is the GDevice's
ColorTable, defining all colors available on that GDevice. If the
GDevice is associated with a hardware (physical) graphics device,
then the PixMap will contain a reference to the hardware image
memory. PixMaps and ColorTables are discussed in detail later in
this chapter.
• gdRect - This field holds the bounding rectangle that defines the
maximum extent of all graphics operations on that GDevice. It
should be the same as the PixMap's bounding rectangle.
• gdType - This field indicates the color model defined by the
GDevice: indexed, fixed, or direct. With respect to graphics
devices, the Classic QuickDraw color model is a functional subset
of the other three color models and isn't considered a unique
gdType value. The PixMap stored in gdPMap, and the values within
it, must agree with the value stored in gdType.
These are some of the more important GDevice concepts:
• Handle-based access - As stated earlier, this is true of many
important QuickDraw data structures. Variables of type GDevice
shouldn't be used.
• Public GDevice - A "public" GDevice is one that is used as a
software interface to a hardware graphics device, typically a graphics display controller. Public GDevices are usually created by the
Slot Manager at boot time, according to information contained in the
controller's NuBus board's ROM or System folder startup files.
Public GDevices contain references to a software device driver,
which is referenced by "higher-level" QuickDraw traps. The associated PixMaps data corresponds to actual hardware values.

..,. Graphic Devices

109

• Private GDevice - GDevices may also be created by applications
to define a "private" color environment, independent of all public
GDevices and associated hardware constraints. Private GDevices
typically don't utilize device-based control.
• Current GDevice - The current GDevice is similar to the current
GrafPort and is utilized by various QuickDraw traps through a
system global variable. The current GDevice may be either public
or private.
• Main GDevice - This is the public GDevice that represents the
display monitor that has the menubar on it. The origin of the
main GDevice is (0, 0), which corresponds to the pixel in the
menubar's upper-left corner. There is only one main GDevice per
machine.
• GDevice list - A list of public GDevices is maintained by the
Graphics Device Manager, which is accessible to applications
through a pair of traps. Private GDevices should never be placed
in the GDevice list.
• GDevice attributes - A GDevice has a number of possible attributes that can be tested for, and, in some cases, selectively
enabled or disabled. Such attributes include whether: it is active/
inactive, is the Main GDevice, has color capabilities, and has an
associated device driver. Most GDevice attributes are only relevant to public GDevices. Under certain conditions, an application should determine which attributes are available before
performing a graphics operation.

Creation and Initialization
Developers should realize that the need to create and dispose of
GDevices has been substantially reduced due to the advent of GWorlds,
which manage GDevice-related details internally. GDevice memory
management is described here for informational purposes only. You
should feel strongly encouraged to create and use GWorlds rather
than GDevices.
A GDevice is a dynamic data structure and must be properly allocated and initialized before it's used. The traps to perform these tasks
are as follows:
GDHandle NewGDevice(
short refNum,
long
mode ) ;

11 O

IJll>

Chapter 3

Drawing in Color

void InitGDevice(
short
refNum,
long
mode,
GDHandle theGD ) ;
void DisposGDevice(
GDHandle theGD );

The NewGDevice() trap returns a partially initialized GDevice, allocating but not initializing its PixMap and ITab (inverse table) fields.
These allocations are made in the System heap, not the application
heap. The other GDevice fields must be initialized by the application.
Information on how to perform these tasks is covered later in this
chapter. An example of this involved process is shown in Listing 3-5.
Listing 3-5. Creating a GDevice
GDHandle GDevice_Create(
Boolean isClutType )
GDHandle gdh;
/* allocate a fresh new GDevice */
gdh = NewGDevice( 0, (long) (-1) ); /* -1 specifies no driver*/
i f (gdh ! = NULL)
{

(**gdh) .gdID = (-1);

/* arbitrary */

(**gdh) .gdType = (isClutType ? clutType : directType);
(**gdh) .gdResPref = 5;
/* maximum resolution for */
/* inverse table */
(**gdh) .gdNextGD = NULL; /* generally, private GDevs */
/* aren't linked */
/* a "standard" screen size */
SetRect( &((**gdh) .gdRect), 0, 0, 640, 480 ) ;
/* this is a color-capable gdevice */
/* which doesn't have an associated device driver */
SetDeviceAttribute( gdh, gdDevType, TRUE ) ;
SetDeviceAttribute( gdh, noDriver, TRUE ) ;
/* since these are hardware characteristics, */
/* they're not applicable */
SetDeviceAttribute( gdh, rnainScreen, FALSE);

..,. Graphic Devices

SetDeviceAttribute( gdh, screenDevice, FALSE
SetDeviceAttribute( gdh, screenActive, FALSE
SetDeviceAttribute( gdh, burstDevice, FALSE
SetDeviceAttribute( gdh, raminit, FALSE ) ;
SetDeviceAttribute( gdh, allinit, FALSE ) ;

111

) ;
) ;
) ;

I*
** Note: an inverse table and pixmap will need to be set up!
*/

return gdh;

This routine performs most of the work needed to create a GDevice;
still, it leaves a fair amount of work undone. In particular, the GDevice
created by this routine still requires data structures to be installed in
the GDevice's gdPMap and gdITab fields.
The InitGDevice() trap should be called only to initialize a public
GDevice that has an associated device driver. It associates a GDevice
record with its device driver and inserts it into the GDevice list. There are
few, if any, circumstances under which applications should call this trap.
As with most dynamic data structures, a GDevice should be disposed
of when an application no longer requires it. The DisposGDevice()
trap deallocates the GDevice and its associated PixMap and ITable
fields. The dynamically allocated fields inside of the GDevice's PixMap
will need to be disposed of before calling this trap; this process is
described later in this chapter.
Accessing the GDevice List

The device list contains references to all public GDevices known to the
Graphics Devices Manager. The traversal of this list and subsequent
read-only access of individual GDHandles can be accomplished though
the following six traps:
GDHandle GetGDevice( void);
void SetGDevice(
GDHandle theGD );

These two traps are used to obtain and define the current GDevice,
which will consequently affect all color mapping and pixel data trans-

112

..,. Chapter 3

Drawing in Color

fer operations. They are to be used in a manner similar to GetPort()
and SetPort().
GDHandle GetDeviceList( void};
GDHandle GetNextDevice(
GDHandle theGD };

These traps provide direct access to the GDevice list. An example of
traversing this list is shown in Listing 3-6, which simply counts the
number of GDevices in the list.
Listing 3-6. Example of accessing the device list
short CountGDevs( void
{

GDHandle
short

curGD;
gdCounter;

gdCounter = 0;
curGD = GetDeviceList(};
while (curGD != NULL}
{

gdCounter++;
curGD = GetNextDevice( curGD );

return gdCounter;

These two traps
GDHandle GetMainDevice ( void ) ;
GDHandle GetMaxDevice(
Rect
*globalBounds );

allow an application to obtain a GDHandle to a particular device,
based on specific device attributes. GetMainDevice() returns the
GDHandle of the main (menu bar) display GDevice. GetMaxDevice()
returns a GDHandle to the GDevice of the greatest pixel depth that
intersects the globalBounds argument in global coordinates. Many
applications may find the need to obtain more detailed information about
available public GDevices; in such cases, explicitly traversing the
GDevice list is more appropriate than using either of these two traps.

.,.. Graphic Devices

113

Managing GDevice Attributes

The attributes of individual GDevices can be accessed via the following traps.
Boolean TestDeviceAttribute (
GDHandle
theGD,
short
attribute ) ;
void SetDeviceAttribute (
GDHandle
theGD ,
short
attribute,
Boolean
value ) ;

The GDevice attributes are maintained as a set of flags in a GDevice' s
gdFiags field. The TestDeviceAttribute() and SetDeviceAttribute() traps
should always be used to access this field indirectly. Only one
attribute may be set or tested for at a time .
.,,,,-

Important~

..-

The GDevice list is global to all applications. Setting GDevice
attributes carelessly will almost certainly cause failure in some or
all of the applications running at that time .

.,.. Color Mapping
Color mapping is the term used to describe the process of substituting a
color value for one that isn't available on the current indexed GDevice.
On a direct GDevice, color mapping is academic, since all colors in the
RGB colorspace are available, at least within a fixed tolerance.
The process of color mapping is undertaken jointly by the Color and
Graphics Devices Managers and occurs under very specific circumstances. The circumstances may be related to copying data between
structures that have ColorTables that differ from the current GDevice's
ColorTable, or are related to the management of color requests associated with windows. The former case is discussed later in this chapter;
the latter case is treated in detail in Chapter 4.
GDevice ColorTables and Color Mapping

ColorTables are of particular importance to indexed GDevices. An
indexed display controller maintains a ColorTable to describe those
colors currently available for display. When a graphics operation pro-

114

.,.. Chapter 3

Drawing in Color

duces RGB values that aren't in the GDevice's ColorTable, color mapping
must occur - otherwise the result cannot be assigned. The primary
method of color mapping is the Color Manager trap Color2Index(),
whose interface is shown here:
long Color2Index(
RGBColor *anRGB );

On indexed GDevices, this trap returns the color entry index with
the closest matching RGB value. On direct GDevices, this trap returns
the appropriate 16- or 32-bit packed RGB value. This value is called a
pixel index value, which is how a pixel value is represented within a
pixel image variable.
The primary sources of "out-of-bounds" RGB values are pen color
assignments and pixel image transfers. QuickDraw compares the ctSeed
values of the source PixMap and the current GDevice's PixMap when
copying data between PixMaps. If the two seed values are the same,
the two ColorTables are assumed to be the same and no color mapping is performed; pixel values are just transferred from one PixMap
to the other.
Inverse Tables

Going from a pixel index value to its corresponding RGB color value
involves a simple table lookup. Going from a color value to an indexed value requires a special data structure known as an inverse table.
Inverse tables are generally "owned" by GDevices and referenced by
various Color Manager traps. Listing 3-7 shows the InverseTable data
structure.
Listing 3-7. lnverseTable data structure
typedef struct
{

long
short
char

iTabSeed;
iTabRes;
iTTable[l];

ITab, *ITabPtr, **ITabHandle;

The iTabSeed field operates in conjunction with the similarly named
ctSeed field in a ColorTable: It contains a unique identifying value,
which is used by the Color Manager to indicate when an lnverseTable

.., Graphic Devices

115

is out of synch with the GDevice' s ColorTable. When an entry in the
GDevice's ColorTable is changed, the ColorTable's ctSeed value is incremented. Any Color Manager trap that subsequently references that
InverseTable will compare its seed value with the ColorTable's seed
value; if the two seeds differ, the InverseTable is rebuilt immediately.
Inverse Table Resolution and Hidden Colors. Functionally, inverse
table access is the reverse process of ColorTable access: Use an
RGBColor value to point into a table of pixel index values and retrieve
the associated index value. Unfortunately, inverse table lookup isn't
quite as simple as it may seem. The inverse table takes an RGB value
as an index and produces an index value as output. Now stop and
consider the memory implications of this simple statement. To build a
table with one entry for each possible unique RGB value would require a table with (2 16 ) 3, or 248 entries! The Color Manager shrinks the
inverse table to a manageable size by reducing the precision of the
RGB components. The iTabRes value defines the inverse table's resolution, that is, how many bits are used from each RGB component to
build inverse table index values. The maximum resolution allowed is
five. When an RGB triplet is looked up in an inverse table, the highorder bits of the three RGB components are combined into a 16-bit
index value, as shown in Figure 3-10.
RGBColor value

Legend

D Red

••

Green
Bit 15

BitO

Blue

D (unused)

5-bit Inverse Table index value

Bit 15

Bit 0

Figure 3-10. Building an inverse table index
This value is used to index into inverse tables in much the same way
an indexed pixel value is used to point into a ColorTable, as shown in
Figure 3-11 .

116

.,.. Chapter 3

Drawing in Color

32 bits Total
value

R

IG

B

ColorTable:
entry size : 4 * 2 = 8 bytes
total table size:
(2 to the n) +size of (header)
where n = 1, 2, 4, or 8

Pixel index
value

I

RGBColor
value
Legend

•

D

0
0
0

Red

Green

Blue

(unused)

•

D

8 bits
pixel index values
pixel index

0

RGBColor
value

1

i

2

Inverse Table
index value

.......
--..-

0
0
0
pixel index value n-1
(hidden color
mapping
information)

Figure 3- 11 . Inverse table indexing

Inverse Table:
entry size: 8 bits
total size:
2to the (3*n) +
size of (hidden mapping info)
wh ere n = 3, 4, or 5

....

Pixel index
value

IJIJ>

Graphic Devices

117

Let's use 5-bit resolution as an example. By using a 15-bit index, the
associated table has only 215 = 32768 entries - not zillions. But there is
a problem with this reduced resolution: RGB values that differ in the
lower-order bits are mapped into the same inverse table index. Consider two RGB triplets that reside in the current device's ColorTable
and have the values shown in Table 3-1.
Table 3-1. Calculating inverse table index values

Decimal

Hex

Binar!i.

rl
gl
bl

2048
7168
7168

0800
lCOO
ICOO

0000 0100 0000 0000
0001 1100 0000 0000
0001 1100 0000 0000

r2
g2
b2

0
7168
7168

0000
ICOO
lCOO

0000 0000 0000 0000
0001 1100 0000 0000
0001 1100 0000 0000

Using the high-order 5 bits from each component to make a 15-bit
inverse table index yields the same result in both cases, as shown in
Table 3-2.
Table 3-2. Results of calculating inverse table indexes

iTablndexl
iTablndex2

Decimal

Binar!:f.

99
99

00000/00011/00011
00000/00011/00011

You can see that although the two RGB triplets are different, the
difference occurs in the sixth bit of precision. Go to the Color Picker
dialog and check the RGB values listed in Table 3-1. You'll realize that
the difference between the two colors specified is invisibly tiny they differ in the sixth bit of one of three 8-bit numbers. Color values
that differ from each other below the resolution are referred to as
hidden colors. The lower the inverse table's resolution, the greater the
potential number of hidden colors.
The Color Manager has a few tricks up its sleeve to deal with these
indexing collisions; it appends to the inverse table information that
allows it to break ties when two or more colors map into the same
inverse table index. This information is used by Color2Index(), which

118

~

Chapter 3

Drawing in Color

will return the "best" match. Keep this in mind: A GDevice' s inverse
table is built by the Color Manager from that GDevice's ColorTable, so
the Color Manager knows which colors will cause inverse table lookup
collisions before any color mapping is performed.
Note~

The arithmetic transfer modes are described in Inside Macintosh,
Volume V, as not using the inverse table for colors.Race calculations.
This means that the resolution of hidden colors via the inverse
table'.s ,.,additional information" isn't performed, causing "ties"
between hidden colors to be overlooked.
Using Inverse Tables. The inverse table doesn't really require much
explicit management effort. The only time that an application needs
explicitly be involved with inverse tables is during the process of creating an
indexed GDevice. This task is performed with the Color Manager trap
MakeITable(), which has the following interface:
OSErr MakeITable (
theCTable ,
CTabHandle
theITab,
ITabHandle
resolution ) ;
short

The "resolution" can be 3, 4, 5, or O; a zero tells this trap to use the
value of the GDevice' s gdResPref field. If either the CTable or !Table
arguments are NULL, then the appropriate argument is the one associated with the current GDevice. As a consequence, inverse table
installation is simple; just create one after creating the GDevice to
which it belongs, as shown in Listing 3-8.
Listing 3-8. Example of installing an inverse table
void CreatingindexedGDevice( void )
{

GDHandle
OSErr

someGD , savedGD ;
errStat ;

/* allocate and initialize a GDevice */
someGD = NewGDevice() ;
/* initialize rest of the GDevice ' s fields */
(**someGD) .gdResPref = 5;

.,... Graphic Devices

119

/* initialize rest of the GDevice PixMap's fields */
InitPixMap( (**someGD) .gdPMap, 8 );
/* create and install inverse table */
savedGD = GetGDevice();
SetGDevice( someGD ) ;
errStat = MakeITable( NULL, NULL, 0 );
if (errStat != noErr)

SetGDevice( savedGD ) ;

There are circumstances where it may be desirable to know beforehand how specific colors will get matched without performing a
drawing operation. The Color Manager provides such a tool in the
form of the GetSubTable() trap, which has the following interface:
void GetSubTable(
inputCTab,
CTabHandle
ITabHandle
invTable,
CTabHandle
outputCTab ) ;

This trap runs "inputCTab" through "invTable" to produce
"outputCTab." If required, "outputCTab" is resized as necessary. If
"invTable" is NULL, then the one on the current GDevice is used
instead. Both CTabHandle arguments must refer to valid, allocated
CTables. The resulting ColorTable can then be analyzed for closeness
of color mapping.

Search and Complement Procedures
Another degree of color control offered by QuickDraw comes through
the use of search procedures. A search procedure is a routine for
determining how a color should be represented on a given GDevice.
Recall that destination color information comes from the current
GDevice. For indexed devices, QuickDraw uses an inverse table to
determine with which index to represent a given color. For direct
devices, QuickDraw merely truncates each component of the RGBColor
to the desired size: 5 bits for 16-bit color, 8 bits for 32-bit color.
By installing a search procedure on a GDevice, an application can
control the way colors are represented on that GDevice. If a search

120

.,.. Chapter 3

Drawing in Color

procedure is installed on a GDevice, QuickDraw calls the search procedure every time a color is needed to draw on that device. This allows
full control over the way colors are mapped within the application.
Important llJ>

If an af!plication attaches a search procedure to a public GDevice,
lt mus± make sure it's removed immediately after performing the
desil'ed drawing operation, as it will affect drawing in all other
applic~fions. A search procedure should n~ver be left installed on
a puolic GDevice across a call to WaitNextEvent().
QuickDraw calls the current GDevice's installed search procedures
whenever it needs to determine how a color should be represented.
The only exception is for the arithmetic transfer modes in CopyBits().
If an application needs the result of an arithmetic transfer using
CopyBits() to be processed by a search procedure, it must perform the
operation first and then use CopyBits() with the "srcCopy" mode to
copy the result into the desired destination pixel image.
How SearchProcs Influence Drawing. QuickDraw uses the following
Pascal interface to call a search procedure:
pasca l Boo l ean SearchProc(
RGBColor *theCo l or ,
*pos i tion) ;
l ong

Note llJ>

~

Search procedures are really functions since they return a result.
They are often called searchProcs, so the term search procedure stuck
even though it isn't technically accurate. It just sounds weird to
say searchFunc.
..!.

..112.

The RGBColor argument passed into the searchProc is one that can
be modified and returned to the calling trap, and it describes the color
that the Color QuickDraw trap is attempting to map into the current
GDevice. If the search procedure returns a result of TRUE, the result
argument is used for the destination color. The QuickDraw trap attempting to map an RGBColor will call each installed search procedure on the current GDevice until one of them returns a TRUE match
value.

~

Graphic Devices

121

If the destination is an indexed GDevice, the result is expected to be
a pixel index value. If the destination is a direct GDevice, the result is
expected to be a direct color at the GDevice's pixel depth.
If the search procedure returns a result of FALSE, QuickDraw passes
the returned RGBColor to the next search procedure (if another exists
on this device), or performs the default color mapping using an
inverse table for indexed devices or truncation for direct devices.
Search procedures are installed on the current device using the
AddSearch() trap, which has the following interface:
void AddSearch(
ProcPtr searchProcAddr );

The search procedure will be called before any subsequent drawing
occurs to that GDevice. To remove an installed search procedure from
the current GDevice, use the DelSearch() trap, which has the following interface:
void DelSearch(
ProcPtr searchProcAddr ) ;

Some SearchProc Techniques. Search procedures can be used to perform useful image processing operations. Inside Macintosh, Volume V,
omits the fact that the RGB color passed to a search procedure is a "Var"
argument; that is, one that can be modified and returned to the calling
routine or trap. This property of the search procedure is very useful,
as you can simply modify the RGBColor argument and return FALSE.
Certain useful image processing operations, such as darkening or lightening an image, can be performed in this manner. Listing 3-9 shows an
example of a search procedure which darkens all drawing that occurs
on the GDevice where the search procedure is installed.
Listing 3-9. Example of a search procedure
pascal Boolean Darken(
RGBColor *targetRGB,
long
*result )
targetRGB->red >>= l;
targetRGB->green >>= l;
targetRGB->blue >>= l;
return FALSE;

122

~

Chapter 3 Drawing in Color

This search procedure darkens each color component by a factor of
2. Notice that if you wanted to darken drawing by a factor of 4, you
could install this same procedure to the GDevice twice. A search
procedure that lightens drawing would be similar.

...,. Color GrafPorts
In order to make Classic QuickDraw color-capable, a new version
Gra£Port structure had to be designed. The CGra£Port, or Color
Gra£Port, provides the informational capacity required by the new
color traps while maintaining compatibility backward (old code runs
on new machines) and forward (new code runs on old machines - if
written well). These aims were realized by observing the following
design rules:
• Color QuickDraw must be "transparently aware" of GrafPorts The Color QuickDraw versions of the Classic QuickDraw recognize
"black-and-white only" applications; they execute GrafPort-based
code in a manner that is indistinguishable to both the user and
the application. Simply put, black-and-white applications are still
black and white to the user, and, presuming that the application
in question meets Apple's published compatibility guidelines, it
won't crash.
• The expansion of the GrafPort to the CGrafPort must maintain
the field types and ordering - The exceptions occur in fields
that were previously considered "private" to QuickDraw traps,
that is, they were not to be accessed directly by application code.
For the sake of comparison, the GrafPort and CGra£Port data structures are shown in Listing 3-10.
Listing 3-10. GrafPort and CGrafPort data structures
typedef struct
{

short
BitMap
Rect
RgnHandle
RgnHandle
Pattern
Pattern

device;
portBits;
portRect;
visRgn;
clipRgn;
bkPat;
fillPat;

~

Point
Point
short
Pattern
short
short
Style
short
short
long
long
long
short
short
QDHandle
QDHandle
QDHandle
QDProcsPtr

pnLoc;
pnSize;
pnMode;
pnPat;
pnVis;
txFont;
txFace;
txMode;
txSize;
spExtra;
fgColor;
bkColor;
colrBit;
pat Stretch;
picsave;
rgnSave;
polySave;
grafProcs;

GrafPort, *GrafPtr;
typedef struct
{

short
PixMapHandle
short
Handle
short
short
Rect
RgnHandle
RgnHandle
PixPatHandle
RGBColor
RGBColor
Point
Point
short
PixPatHandle
PixPatHandle
short
short
Style
short
short

device;
portPixMap;
portVersion;
grafVars;
chExtra;
pnLocHFrac;
portRect;
visRgn;
clipRgn;
bkPixPat;
rgbFgColor;
rgbBkColor;
pnLoc;
pnSize;
pnMode;
pnPixPat;
fillPixPat;
pnVis;
txFont;
txFace;
txMode;
txSize;

Color GrafPorts

123

124

IJJJ.

Chapter 3

Drawing in Color

Fixed
long
long
short
short
QDHandle
QDHandle
QDHandle
CQDProcsPtr

spExtra;
fgColor;
bkColor;
colrBit;
patStretch;
picSave;
rgnSave;
polySave;
grafProcs;

CGrafPort, *CGrafPtr;

Although it may seem as though much has changed from the GrafPort
to the CGrafPort, in actuality they are the same size. The reference to
the GrafPort's embedded BitMap has been replaced by a Handle to a
PixMap, a substantially extended version of a BitMap. The size difference between a BitMap and a PixMapHandle is 14 bytes; not coincidentally, the new CGrafPort fields are exactly 14 bytes long and follow
the PixMapHandle field. The references to the various Patterns have
been replaced with Handles to PixPats (color pixel patterns). These
are described later in this chapter.

...,. Pen Colors
Of all functional enhancements afforded by the CGrafPort, true pen
colors are probably the easiest to use, and they create the most dramatic impact. The Classic color model limited pen color choices to
eight basic colors, including black and white, all of which were assigned using the ForeColorO and BackColor() traps. Even this limited
repertoire was academic; unless you had an ImageWriter with a color
ribbon and software that printed in multiple passes, you weren't
likely to see any colors other than black and white.
Under the Classic color model, pen color usage is performed implicitly: Drawing takes place using the foreground color; erasing is simply
drawing in the background color. The GrafPort's default foreground
and background colors were black and white, and few applications
had much need to change them.
Color QuickDraw provides two new traps, RGBForeColor() and
RGBBackColor(), to assign a "true" pen color. Using them is surprisingly simple, as shown in Listings 3-11 and 3-12.

..,. Color GrafPorts

125

Listing 3-11. Simple drawing example
void DrawBoxes( void )
{

Rect boxRect;
/* set old-style pattern*/
PenPat( black ) ;
/* paint one big rectangle */
SetRect( &boxRect, 0, 0, 100, 100 ) ;
OffsetRect( &boxRect, 20, 20 ) ;
PaintRect( &boxRect ) ;
/* erase four small rectangles */
SetRect( &boxRect, 0, 0, 20, 20 );
OffsetRect( &boxRect, 40, 40 );
EraseRect( &boxRect ) ;
OffsetRect( &boxRect, 40, 0 );
EraseRect( &boxRect ) ;
OffsetRect( &boxRect, -40, 40 );
EraseRect( &boxRect ) ;
OffsetRect( &boxRect, 40, 0 );
EraseRect( &boxRect ) ;

The graphic result of calling DrawBoxes() is shown in Figure 3-12.

••
•

II

Figure 3-12. Results of DrawBoxes()

126

.,. Chapter 3

Drawing in Color

Listing 3-12 shows DrawColorBoxes(), a version of DrawBoxes()
with the addition of RGB-based pen color control. The results would
be red rectangles inside of a larger green rectangle.
Listing 3-12. Simple drawing example with pen color control
void DrawColorBoxes( void )
{

RGBColor curPenRGB;
Rect
boxRect;
/* set the foreground pen color to brightest green */
curPenRGB.red = OxOOOO;
curPenRGB.green = OxFFFF;
curPenRGB.blue = OxOOOO;
RGBForeColor( &curPenRGB ) ;
/* set the background pen color to brightest red */
curPenRGB.red = OxFFFF;
curPenRGB.green = OxOOOO;
curPenRGB.blue = OxOOOO;
RGBBackColor( &curPenRGB );
PenPat( black);
/* paint one big rectangle */
SetRect( &boxRect, 0, 0, 100, 100 );
OffsetRect( &boxRect, 20, 20 );
PaintRect( &boxRect );
/* erase four small rectangles */
SetRect( &boxRect, 0, 0, 20, 20 ) ;
OffsetRect( &boxRect, 40, 40 ) ;
EraseRect( &boxRect ) ;

OffsetRect( &boxRect, 40, 0 ) ;
EraseRect( &boxRect );
OffsetRect( &boxRect, -40, 40 );
EraseRect( &boxRect );
OffsetRect( &boxRect, 40, 0 );
EraseRect( &boxRect );

~

Note.,..

Color Graf Ports

127

Applications that used pen colors other than black
GrafPorts will show drawing results in the selected
ning on a Macintosh with a color monitor. It must~ve :aijj;
the developers of those applications to see color a~
magically on color monitors after viewing their appli~atiort ift
black and white on pre-~acintosh II machines .

.,.. Transfer Modes
Color QuickDraw introduces a new family of transfer modes, known
as arithmetic transfer modes. These modes calculate resultant pixel values by adding, subtracting, or averaging the RGB components of the
source and destination pixel values.
The logical transfer modes perform bitwise logical operations that
are a function of source pixel value, the current port's foreground and
background pen colors, and the corresponding destination pixel value pixel by pixel - to compute a value for the resulting pixel that then
replaces the destination pixel in the destination PixMap.
Arithmetic Modes
Some of these modes factor in a third constant RGB operand, which is
stored in the CGrafPort. The constants are listed in the following
sections.
Operand Color. This value is used either as a weighting or threshold
value. As a weighting value, it prescribes to the amount of source and
destination values in the resultant RGB value. As a threshol9, it
assigns the maximum or minimum value of additive and subtractive
operations. The default operand color is black and can be reset on a
CGrafPort basis using the OpColor() trap.
Highlighting Color. In the black-and-white world, highlighting a
selection is simple. Inverting monochrome pixel values yields acceptable visual results: White pixels turn black and vice versa. In a color
environment, simple complementation doesn't always produce an obvious visible selection, because the inversion of multibit pixel values
generally yields many different colors, which is unsuitable for highlighting text and other graphic objects.

128

Ill- Chapter 3 Drawing in Color

To remedy this shortcoming, Color QuickDraw allows for the specification of a highlight value that will be used to replace all selected
pixels of the CGrafPort's current background color. The default highlight value is set by the user via the Control Panel and can be reset on
a CGrafPort basis using the HiliteColor() trap.
There are ten arithmetic modes. Their effects are described as follows.
addPin I addOver. These modes add the source and destination RGB
values. AddOver will "wraparound" addition overflow, whereas
addPin "pins" addition to the current value of the operand color,
ignoring overflow. An example illustrating the effects of these modes
is shown in Table 3-3, using an operand color of RGB = (65535, 65535,
65535).
Table 3-3. Example of RGB color addition

addPin:
add Over:

Source
32767
32767

Destination
+
+

40959
40959

Result
=
=

65535
12286

You'll probably find addPin more appropriate than addOver.
subPin I subOver. These modes subtract the source RGB values from
those of the destination. Similar to their additive counterparts, subOver
will "wraparound" subtraction underflow, whereas subPin pins results to the current value of the operand color. An example illustrating
the effects of these modes is shown in Table 3-4, using an operand
color of RGB = (0, 0, 0).
Table 3-4. Example of RGB color subtraction

subPin:
subOver:

Source
32767
32767

Destination
40959
40959

Result
0

57344

adMax I adMin. These modes calculate the result by taking the maximum or minimum values for each source and destination RGB component. An example illustrating the effects of these modes is shown in
Table 3-5.

.,.. Color GrafPorts

129

Table 3-5. Example of RGB color maximum and minimum
thresholding
adMax:

Source

Destination

Result

Red:
Green:
Blue:

20480
36863
0

40959
12287
52992

40959
36863
52992

adMin:

Source

Destination

Result

Red:
Green:
Blue:

20480
36863
0

40959
12287
52992

20480
12287
0

These modes are especially useful for image thresholding operations. For example, an application could display only the brightest
colors of an image by following these steps:
1. Render the image offscreen.
2. Set the appropriate RGB threshold value as the foreground color.
3. Call PenMode(), passing it the "adMax" constant.
4. Call FillRect(), passing it the image's boundary Rect.
5. Copy the offscreen image into a window.

I By the Way ~ I

The name "ad.Max" stands for "arithmetic drawing maximum,"
and "adMin" is short for "arithmetic drawing minimum." The
"ad-" prefix shouldn't be construed to mean "additive." At least
one compiler company has made that mistake in their header file,
misnaming "adMax" and "adMin" as "addMax" and "add.Min,"
respectively.
blend. This mode "blends" source and destination RGB values, using
the operand color as a weighting factor for averaging. The result is
determined by the following formula as applied to each RGB component value:

result

=

source x operand
65535

+

(65535 - destination) x operand
65535

130

.,. Chapter 3

Drawing in Color

Pretty messy. Perhaps the example in Table 3-6 will help. It uses an
operand color of RGB = (32767, 32767, 32767).
Table 3-6. Example of RGBColor blending

Blend

Source

Destination

Red
Green
Blue

20480
36863
0

8160
12287
52736

Result
=

14320
24575
26368

In this example, the value of 32767 ($7FFF hexadecimal) was chosen
for all three operand color components to achieve an equally weighted
50-50 average of source and destination values. Although the mathematics may seem involved, the results of a blend operation should be
fairly intuitive: Blending a bright red source with a bright blue destination will produce a purple that will be slightly darker than either
source or destination.
hilite. This is basically a color extension of the Invert GraNerb. The hilite
transfer mode provides an aesthetic solution to the problem of highlighting by inversion: All pixel values of the current background color
are replaced with the value of the highlighting color, and vice versa.
transparent. Not really a transfer mode itself, transparent is used as a
modifier in conjunction with the Classic bitwise transfer modes srcCopy
and patCopy. Transparency causes pixels in the destination to be
replaced by pixels in the appropriate source pixel, provided that the
source pixel value isn't equal to the current background color. This
makes pattern-based fills "transparent" at those points in the pattern
that equal the background color value.
grayishTextOr. With the intro9.uction of System 7.0 comes a useful
feature for rendering "grayed out" text to indicate disabled items. The
feature is implemented in the form of a new text transfer mode:
GrayishTextOr mode (31), a text mode that draws with the average of
the foreground and background colors in the current port.
Traditionally, grayed text was rendered in the manner described in
Listing 3-13.

~

Color GrafPorts

131

Listing 3-13. "Old-style" way to draw grayed-out text
void DrawGrayString(
char *aPascalStringPtr
PenState
Font Info
Re ct
Point
short

savedPenState;
curFontlnfo;
textBoundsR;
penPosi~ion;

textHorizExtent, savedTextMode;

if ({aPascalStringPtr ==NULL) I I {aPascalStringPtr[OJ
RETURN;
/* determine the bounding rectangle where the text */
/* is to be rendered */
GetFontlnfo( &curFontinfo );
penPosition = thePort->pnLoc;
textHorizExtent = StringWidth{ aPascalStringPtr ) ;
SetRect{
&textBoundsR, 0, 0, textHorizExtent,
curFontlnfo.ascent + curFontlnfo.descent ) ;
OffsetRect{
&textBoundsR, penPosition.h,
penPosition.v - curFontlnfo.descent );
/* be nice and save state */
GetPenState( &savedPenState ) ;
savedTextMode = thePort->txMode;
/* draw the text */
TextMode( srcCopy );
Drawstring{ aPascalStringPtr );
/* "punch out" the text in the black portion */
/* of the gray pattern */
PenPat { gray ) ;
PenMode{ patBic );
FillRect( &textBoundsR );
/* be even nicer and restore state */
TextMode( savedTextMode ) ;
SetPenState{ &savedPenState );

'\0'))

132

.,. Chapter 3 Drawing in Color

On 1-bit image, grayishTextOr draws text with the familiar 50 percent gray pattern.
This text transfer mode is meant to be used for user interface purposes only. Most of the grayed text used in Finder 7.0 is drawn using
this mode. Currently, the information associated with this mode isn't
stored in pictures and is undefined for printing. This may change in
future versions of QuickDraw.
If an application draws text using grayishTextOr, the StdText() bottleneck procedure will receive a text mode of grayishTextOr. The System
7.0 sample WDEF from Apple uses grayishTextOr, and there is a
Gestalt flag that returns whether or not the mode is available.
These arithmetic modes facilitate a number of powerful image processing operations that would be difficult or impossible with the
original transfer modes. Listing 3-14 shows .a simple example of tinting an image using the blend mode.
Listing 3- 14. Use of OpColor() with the blend transfer mode
void AdjustTint(
RgnHandle
interestRgn,
SmallFract tintFactor,
Boolean
makeLighter )
PortColorState
PenState
RGBColor
short

savedColorinfo;
savedPenState;
newRGBColor, newOpColor;
arithPenMode;

if (EmptyRgn( interestRgn ))
RETURN;
GetPenState( &savedPenState ) ;
CPort_GetColorState( &savedColorinfo );
/* determine a good "tintFactor" value: Ox3FFF will tint 25% */
newOpColor.red = newOpColor.green = newOpColor.blue =
tintFactor;
arithPenMode = blend;
i f (makeLighter)

newRGBColor.red
OxFFFF;
else
newRGBColor.red
OxOOOO;

newRGBColor.green

newRGBColor.blue

newRGBColor.green

newRGBColor.blue

~

Color GrafPorts

133

OpColor( &newOpColor ) ;
RGBForeColor( &newRGBColor );
PenMode( arithPenMode ) ;
PenPat( black ) ;
PaintRgn( interestRgn ) ;
CPort_SetColorState( &savedColorinfo );
SetPenState( &savedPenState );

Logical Transfer Modes

The bitwise logic that is applied to the source and destination pixels
works most understandably when the pixels are 1 bit deep (BitMaps),
as in the days when Macintoshes had only black-and-white screens.
When performed on multi-bit pixel images, the results of these bitwise
operators may seem, at first blush, counterintuitive. The logical transfer modes still perform the same operations that were done on blackand-white pixels, but the results can be unexpected, particularly with
indexed PixMaps. When bitwise operations are performed on indexed
pixel values, the calculations are performed on the indexes themselves, not on the RGB color values they represent. Such an operation
is said to take place in index space, as opposed to colorspace. Consider the partial ColorTable shown in Table 3-7.
Table 3-7. Partial ColorTable example

Entry

R

G

B

0
1
2
3

$0000
$FFFF
$0000
$90FO

$0000
$0000
$FFFF
$5AA5

$0000
$FFFF
$0000
$8888

Now consider an operation using srcOr mode, where source pixels
of value 1 are combined with destination pixel values of 2.
In RGB color space:
CTab.rgb[l] OR CTab.rgb[2]
= ($FFFF, $0000, $FFFF) OR ($0000, $FFFF, $0000)

= ($FFFF, $FFFF, $FFFF)

134

~

Chapter 3 Drawing in Color

In index space:
1 OR2
= (0000 0001) OR (0000 0010)
= 0000 0011
= 3
Is the difference clear now? The important idea here is that arithmetic transfer modes operate in colorspace, and logical transfer modes
operate in index space. So choose your transfer modes wisely.
Index space operations on indexed GDevices proceed according to
the diagram in Figure 3-13.
QuickDraw Process:

Produces Data Values:

1. Extract values from source and
destination pixel image variables

!------------2. Perform the index space operation,
based on transfer mode

!-------------

Source pixel index value
Destination pixel index value

Result pixel index value

3. Assign index value back into
destination image variable

!

4 Done

Figure 3-13. Processing index operations

Colorspace operations are shown in Figure 3-14.
The arithmetic modes are colorspace operators. Arithmetic operations usually take more time to execute than bitwise operations because arithmetic operations are more computationally intensive and
because RGBColor values require more memory to store than index
values.

.,.. Digital Images

QuickDraw Process:

135

Produces Data Values:

1. Extract values from source and
destination pixel image variables

.}-----------2. Look up RGB values in image
variable's color tables

.}-----------3. Perform the RGB color space
operation, based on transfer mode

.}------------

Source pixel index value
Destination pixel index value
Source pixel RGB value
Destination pixel RGB value

Result pixel RGB value

4. Build inverse table index value and
use to index into current GDevice's
inverse table

.}------------

Result pixel index value

5. Assign index value back into
destination image variable

!
6. Done

Figure 3- 14. Processing index space to RGB operations

..,.. Digital Images
Digital pictures can be treated as a two-dimensional array of pixel
values. Each pixel has its own value as it's stored in digital memory.
When a pixel value is written to a display GDevice, its digital value is
converted to a voltage that finds its ultimate expression as an amount
of emitted light on a raster-scan display.
Pixels in computer memory have a few nice properties by virtue of
their digital manifestation. Since digital images are composed of digital values (numbers), they can be statistically manipulated, almost as
if they were a spreadsheet. Pixels in one image can be subtracted from
corresponding pixels in another image to produce a difference image.

136

~

Chapter 3

Drawing in Color

Difference images reveal subtle changes between similar images, such
as a moving planet in a fixed field of stars. A pixel value in an image
can also be numerically compared to its neighbors and then given a
new value based on the result of the comparison; such an operation is
a type of filter function, a filter being a process that takes an image as
input and produces another image as output. Digital images can be
used to express concepts and phenomena visually that aren't by their
nature visual, such as economic data or consumer spending trends. In
other cases, digital images may be obtained from sources that don't
use visual imaging techniques. Many of the different medical imaging
technologies such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and ultrasound can "photograph" internal organs. These images can be assigned color values to emphasize changes between the data points
within the image; when they are displayed with these colors, they are
called false-color images because the image colors aren't related to the
subject's "inherent" color. An indexed pixel image's value-to-color
mapping is defined by the order of ColorSpec entry values within its
ColorTable: It may be either determined mathematically (as with the
rainbow ColorTable in Listing 3-2) or contain arbitrarily ordered RGB
values. To change the false-color mapping, an application can change
color values within the image's ColorTable and redraw it to the screen
or other desired destination GDevice .

..,.. PixMaps
The data structure QuickDraw uses to describe pixel images is the
PixMap, which replaces the BitMap discussed in the previous chapter.
Listing 3-15 shows the PixMap data structure.
Listing 3-15. PixMap data structure
typedef struct
{

Ptr
short
Re ct
short
short
long
Fixed
Fixed
short
short

baseAddr;
rowBytes;
bounds;
prnVersion;
packType;
packSize;
hRes;
vRes;
pixel Type;
pixelSize;

..,. PixMaps

short
short
long
CTabHandle
long

137

cmpCount;
cmpSize;
planeBytes;
pmTable;
pmReserved;

PixMap, *PixMapPtr, **PixMapHandle;

The PixMap is a workhorse of a data structure that is used wherever
a description of related pixels is needed. Every color window contains
a CGrafPort, which in turn contains a PixMap that defines the pixel
values within the window. Color versions of familiar user interface
data structures, such as icons, cursors, and patterns, all contain PixMaps. Image display and output devices are partially described by the
PixMap contained in the gdPMap field of its public GDevice.
These PixMap's baseAddr field points to the memory whose values
represent the pixels currently displayed on the associated display
monitor.
~

PixMap Data Structure Description
Here's how the fields in a PixMap describe a pixel image:

• baseAddr - This field serves the same purpose as it did in a
BitMap; it contains a pointer to a block of memory where the
pixel values are stored, which we refer to as the pixel image buffer
or simply image buffer. Starting at this address, pixel values are
stored sequentially in image row order, beginning with the image's
upper-left pixel. The value of this field can be directly assigned at
PixMap initialization; an existing PixMap's baseAddr value should
be modified only with extreme caution. If Color QuickDraw version 1.0 is available, then reading this value should always be
performed indirectly via the GetPixBaseAddr() trap. The reasons
for this are given in the "Addressing Modes" section of Chapter 9.
• bounds -This field describes the PixMap's coordinate system and
displayable pixel values: The top and left values are often zero,
but not necessarily so.
• rowBytes -This field holds the number of bytes needed to store a
single row of pixel data, rounded up to the nearest even number.
For maximum execution speed, the value of rowBytes should be a
multiple of 4, so that each row of pixel values begins on a long
word boundary. The two highest order bits are reserved as flag

138

.,.. Chapter 3 Drawing in Color

bits, which must always be set to one. These flags are used by
various QuickDraw traps to distinguish between a GrafPort's
BitMap and a CGrafPort's PixMap. The allowable values for
rowBytes are $0 to $3FFE hexadecimal (16,382 decimal), excluding
the flag bits. The usage of flag bits is as follows:
OOxxxxxx
Olxxxxxx
lOxxxxxx
llxxxxxx

BitMap
(illegal)
PixMap
CGrafPort

The value of rowBytes may be larger than the display area indicated by the bounds rectangle. This means that the first pixel of a
row doesn't always follow the last pixel on the previous row.
Therefore, the address of a chunky pixel at (i, j) should be calculated according to the following formula:
pixel[ i, j l =
baseAddr +
(j - bounds . top) * (rowBytes & Ox3FFF) +
( (i - bounds . left) * pixelSize) I 8;

• hRes and vRes - These fields define the resolution of the PixMap
in pixels per inch, expressed as a Fixed (fixed-point) value. Typically, the value of these fields is 72.0 ($4800000 hexadecimal), but
can be changed by the application as needed .
Note""

~fief.~ are initialized by the NewPixMap() trap. Before System
7.0, ~ese IJ.«ds were assigned the value of the current GDevice

Pi.XMa:p's hR:es ~ vRes fields. Now these fields are initialized to
~OQ,Q, ~~less of the cu.rrent GDevice resolutiort;

• pixelSize - This field holds the number of bits per pixel value.
The allowable pixel sizes are any power of two between 1 and 32,
inclusive. Byte-sized (8-bit) pixels are by far the most common.
Within each row of pixels there is no byte- or word-alignment of
pixels.
• cmpCount and cmpSize - The cmpCount field indicates the number of components that make up each pixel value. Indexed pixels
have a cmpCount of 1 because each pixel value is a single indivis-

~

PixMaps

139

ible index into the PixMap's ColorTable. Direct pixel values are
actually the combination of distinct values for R, G, and B; consequently direct pixels typically have cmpCount values of 3.
The cmpSize field indicates the actual size of each pixel value. As
noted in Inside Macintosh, Volume V, the value of pixelSize doesn't
necessarily equal cmpCount x cmpSize. For direct pixels, pixelSize
never equals cmpCount x cmpSize: 32-bit pixels contain only 24
bits of color information, and 16-bit pixels contain only 15 color
information bits.
• pixelType - This field indicates that the baseAddr field points to
indexed (0) or direct (16) pixel values.
• packType - This field indicates which of the three indexed pixel
memory organizations is being used: chunky (0), planar/chunky,
or planar. As of QuickDraw version 1.2, indexed PixMaps are
always chunky.
Chunky:
RGBpixo

RGBpix1

...

Planar/Chunky:

Planar:
RpixO/bitO

Rpixl/bitO ...

RpixO/bitl

Rpix11bit1 •••

GpixO/bitO

Gpixl/bitO •••

GpixO/bitl

Gpix11bit1 •••

BpixO/bitO

Bpixl/bitO •••

BpixO/bitl

Bpixllbitt •••

Indexed PixMaps are always chunky; direct PixMaps can be
either one of three types, except that, as of System 7 QuickDraw
version 1.3, only chunky packing is supported for any type of PixMap.
• planeBytes - This field indicates how many bytes are required for
each color component plane, from the beginning of one color
plane to the beginning of the next. This assumes that the packType
field indicates a planar packed PixMap - if we could use planar
pixel types. For now, leave planeBytes set to 0.

140

~

Chapter 3

Drawing in Color

• pm Version -The field should be set to 0. If the PixMap's baseAddr
memory is only addressable in 32-bit mode, then Bit 2 should be
set. This feature and addressing modes are discussed in detail in
Chapter 9.
• pmReserved - This field should be set to 0 to ensure that the
application will be compatible with future versions of QuickDraw
that might look at that location for more data. This 32-bit quantity
is the hook on which Apple will hang future enhancements to the
PixMap structure.
• pmTable - This field contains a handle to the PixMap's ColorTable. The ColorTable may be shared by other PixMaps, or it may
be NULL, in which case the color values are assumed to be
linearly scaled from the background color (low pixel values) to
the foreground color (high pixel values).
In Tech Note #272, Apple advises that the pmTable of a direct
PixMap should hold a reference to a valid ColorTable. The ColorTable for a direct PixMap should have a ctSeed value equal to
cmpCount x cmpSize. In the case of the preceding example, the
ctSeed value would be 3 x 8, or 24. In the same ColorTable, the
ctFlags and ctSize fields should be set to 0.
~

PixMap Management Traps
Color QuickDraw provides a number of PixMap management traps:
PixMapHandle NewPixMap( void};

This trap simply returns a Handle to a new PixMap. The PixMap's
pmTable field contains a valid Handle to an empty ColorTable. With
the exception of pmTable, the fields of the new PixMap are copied from
the current GDevice's PixMap. Applications need to set the PixMap's
fields explicitly to avoid unforeseen problems. In particular, applications need to determine the PixMap's dimensions and coordinate
system and assign them to the appropriate PixMap structure fields. If
the PixMap is offscreen, then it requires its own private pixel image
memory, which must be allocated and a pointer to it installed in the
baseAddr field.
void DisposPixMap(
PixMapHandle
thePMHdl };

.,..

PixMaps

141

This trap disposes everything that was created by NewPixMap(): the
PixMap and the CTabHandle stored in pmTable field .
void CopyPixMap (
PixMapHandle
PixMapHandle

srcPMHdl,
destPMHdl ) ;

This trap copies the field values of "srcPMHdl" into "destPMHdl",
along with the associated ColorTable. Realize that this trap copies
only the references to pixel memory (baseAddr), not the associated
pixel image data! Both PixMapHandle arguments must be valid
PixMaps, preferably created with NewPixMap().
As you can see, creating PixMaps and determining sensible values
for the PixMap fields isn't a trivial task; two routines to help with
these tasks are described in Listings 3-16 and 3-17 .

.,... PixMap Management Strategies
Now that we understand basic PixMap management, let's look at the
ways in which PixMaps are used within generic applications and
extrapolate some rules and guidelines for effective PixMap utilization.
• A single PixMap is a memory hog - From the perspective of
memory allocation, a PixMap looks something like Figure 3-15.
Image Memory

PixMap

CLUT
0 R
2 R
3 R

••
•
' ••
5
7

•
Figure 3-15. PixMap memory diagram

G
G
G
G
G
G
G

••
••
••
B

....
..
.

142

..,. Chapter 3

Drawing in Color

Deep pixel images require more memory than shallow ones. For
two PixMaps of equal height and width, a 32-bit PixMap requires
four times the memory of an 8-bit PixMap. In the case of a 640pixel-by-480-row image, the difference is on the order of 900K
of memory.
• ColorTables and pixel memory buffers can be shared - Sharing
can save a lot of memory, especially when pixel image buffers are
shared. The drawback of sharing is that an application must
"remember" which PixMaps fields contain references to shared
data structures when disposing of the entire PixMap. An 8-bit
ColorTable requires 2056 bytes. For small images on the order of
50-by-50 pixels, an 8-bit ColorTable uses as much memory as the
pixel values themselves. If you want to conserve memory and
you're dealing with relatively small images, it might be worth the
effort to have the images share the same ColorTable. But be
careful when disposing of or modifying such shared data structures: Drawing with a modified ColorTable can produce unexpected results, and drawing with a disposed ColorTable usually
causes swift and certain application death. Additionally, some
direct PixMaps have a NULL pmTable fields, which should be
checked accordingly before deallocating a PixMap' s ColorTable .

..,.. Creating Offscreen PixMaps
Creating a PixMap involves four distinct steps:
• Allocate space for the PixMap data structure, usually performed
via the NewPixMap() trap.
• Configure the PixMap' s horizontal, vertical, and depth (bits-perpixel) dimensions by explicitly calculating and assigning the appropriate PixMap fields.
• Allocate new pixel image memory (offscreen drawing) or copy a
reference to an existing one (usually an onscreen CGrafPort or a
shared PixMap) and assign a pointer value to the PixMap's
baseAddr field.
• Allocate a new ColorTable or copy reference to an existing one
and install the reference in the PixMap' s pmTable field.
These steps involve a small pile of grunt calculation. Creating an
offscreen PixMap involves the allocation of an image buffer, and
perhaps a private ColorTable as well. NewPixMap() fills in PixMap

~

PixMaps

143

field values with those from the current GDevice, where appropriate.
Two of the routines from Pix:MapsUtils are presented in Listings 3-16 and
3-17 simply to demonstrate how to fill in the appropriate field values,
allocate an image buffer, and duplicate a ColorTable. In particular,
observe the following processes that go on within these routines:
• calculation of rowBytes from the bounds rectangle and pixel size,
• calculation of memory needed for pixel image buffer, and
• the relationship between pixel size and other field values.
Listing 3-16. PixMap_CreateO
PixMapHandle PixMap_Create(
Rect
*theBounds,
short targetDepth,
OSErr *errStat )
GDHandle
PixMapHandle
CTabHandle
Ptr
Re ct
OS Err
long
short

curGDev;
thePixels;
theCTable;
thePixelMem;
mapBounds, maxQDRect;
localErrStat;
theRowBytes;
imageWide, imageTall;

if ((theBounds ==NULL)
return NULL;

I I (targetDepth <= 0))

if (errStat != NULL)
*errStat = (OSErr) (-1);
curGDev = GetGDevice();
thePixels = NewPixMap();
if (thePixels == NULL)
return NULL;
/* allocate pixel image memory */
(**thePixels) .bounds = *theBounds;
(**thePixels) .pixelSize = targetDepth;
localErrStat = PixMap_AllocPixMem( thePixels );
if (localErrStat != noErr)

144

.,. Chapter 3

Drawing in Color

PixMap_Dispose( thePixels ) ;
if (errStat != NULL)
*errStat = localErrStat;
return NULL;

/* get a brand new copy of the current GDevice's CTable */
/* give it a new seed, a non-GD-type CTFlag, and re-index */
if (targetDepth > 8)
{

theCTable = (CTabHandle)NewHandleClear( SL ) ;
(**theCTable) .ctSeed = targetDepth;
else
theCTable = ((**(**curGDev) .gdPMap)) .prnTable;
localErrStat = HandToHand( &theCTable ) ;

if (localErrStat == noErr)
{

/* perform fixup for non-GDevice-based ColorTables */
(**theCTable) .ctFlags = OxOOOO;
for (i=O; i<=(**theCTable) .ctSize; i++)
(**theCTable) .ctTable[i] .value = i;
/*dispose CTable stub, left by NewPixMap(), */
/* and install new CTable */
DisposHandle( (**thePixels) .prnTable );
(**thePixels) .prnTable = theCTable;
else
PixMap_Dispose( thePixels );
*errStat = localErrStat;
return NULL;

if (targetDepth <= 8)
{

(**thePixels) .pixelType = O;
(**thePixels) .crnpCount = 1;
(**thePixels) .c~pSize = targetDepth;
else

~

{**thePixels) .pixelType = 16;
(**thePixels) .crnpCount = 3;
(**thePixels) .crnpSize = {(targetDepth

32)

PixMaps

? 8

145

5);

(**thePixels) .packType
O;
(**thePixels) .packSize
O;
{**thePixels) .planeBytes = OL;
/* at least until a new version comes out! */
(**thePixels) .prnVersion = O;
if (errStat != NULL)
*errStat = localErrStat;
return thePixels;

Listing 3-17. PixMap_AlloclmageBuffO
OSErr PixMap_AllocPixMern(
PixMapHandle thePixels
Rect
Ptr
OSErr
long
short

theBounds;
thePixelMern;
errStat;
irnageWide, irnageTall;
theRowBytes;

if (thePixels == NULL)
return (OSErr) (-1);
theBounds
irnageWide
irnageTall

{**thePixels) .bounds;
theBounds.right - theBounds.left;
theBounds.bottorn - theBounds.top;

/*Note: NewPtrClear{) will take longer than NewPtr{), but*/
/* it initializes the pixel values nicely */
theRowBytes = {(**thePixels) .pixelSize *
((irnageWide + 15) I 16)) * 2;
thePixelMern = NewPtrClear( (Size) (irnageTall *
{long)theRowBytes) );
errStat = MernError();
if (errStat == noErr)
{

146

~

Chapter 3 Drawing in Color

/* set bit for PixMaps */
(**thePixels} .rowBytes
theRowBytes
(**thePixels} .baseAddr = thePixelMern;

OxBOOO;

else
(**thePixels} .baseAddr = NULL;
(**thePixels} .rowBytes = O;

return errStat;

IJli. Color Patterns
Chapter 2 introduced pen patterns and the Pattern data structure as
the facility by which texture is added to shape and line drawing.
Color QuickDraw updates the pen pattern concept substantially with
the introduction of the PixPat, described by the data structure shown
in Listing 3-18.
Listing 3-18. PixPat data structure
typedef struct
{

short
PixMapHandle
Handle
Handle
short
Handle
Pattern

patType;
patMap;
patData;
patXData;
patXValid;
patXMap;
patlData;

PixPat, *PixPatPtr, **PixPatHandle;

The PixPat is based upon the PixMap data structure, as the monochrome Pattern data structure is based on the BitMap, albeit loosely.
However, a PixPat has a number of attributes that its 1-bit cousin
lacks:
• Variable size - Patterns are limited to an 8-by-8 pixel size.
PixPats can have any vertical and horizontal dimension that is an
integral power of two between 2 and 128, inclusive. As a consequence of their variable size, PixPats are Handle-based.

llll>

Color Patterns

147

• Multiple drawing modes - Patterns are always drawn portrelative: Black pixels are drawn in the GrafPort's foreground color;
white pixels are drawn in the background color. PixPats are much
more flexible: They can be relative or absolute. An absolute PixPat
is one where the PixPat's PatMap ColorTable has an entry for
every pixel value. Absolute PixPats aren't affected by the current
pen colors. Any pixel value outside of the ColorTable is drawn
relative to the current pen colors. Relative PixPats are those who
have at least one pixel value outside of PixPat' s ColorTable.
Additionally, PixPats can also be device-relative, where each pixel
value is calculated to simulate a color not available on the current
GDevice. Such PixPats are adjusted before they're referenced for drawing, to ensure the best possible match to the current GDevice pixel
depth and color settings.
~

Using PixPats
The NewPixPat(), CopyPixPat(), and DisposPixPat() traps perform
the same role for PixMaps that the NewRgn(), CopyRgn(), and
DisposRgn() traps do for regions. The most common PixPat-related
crashes occur because a PixPatHandle was used before memory for it
was allocated. The GetPixPat() trap creates a PixPat from a specified
resource template. PixPats may be passed as arguments to Color
GraNerb Fill traps, whose argument lists are similar to their Classic
QuickDraw counterparts. For example:
FillRect( &someRect, somePattern );
FillCRect( &someRect, somePixPatHdl ) ;

~

CGrafPort Pix Pats
The CGrafPort contains PixPats for the current, fill, and erase patterns,
just as the GrafPort does. The Classic QuickDraw PenPat() and BackPat()
traps function with CGrafPorts, changing the CGrafPort's PixPats to
port-relative PixPats. The new PenPixPat() and BackPixPat() traps
take PixPatHandle arguments. Unlike the CFill GraNerb traps, these
pen traps "borrow" the PixPat for their own use. Disposing of a PixPat
currently in use by a CGrafPort as a pen pattern or background (erasing)
pattern usually causes Toolbox failure and/ or application death.

148

..,. Chapter 3

Drawing in Color

""' Creating Custom PixPats
PixPats are a substantial enhancement to the monochrome Pattern.
However, PixPats are somewhat difficult to create, not from a data
structure perspective, but from a data perspective: There are few
means from which to create them from previously existing pixel images. The disk available with this book contains PixMap2PatO and
two other related routines, which facilitate the creation of PixPat
resources (type 'ppat') from memory-based pixel images.
~

Moving Pixels Around
You've seen that a PixMap is the general-purpose way that QuickDraw
keeps track of a picture and that they're used in a number of different
places. So it stands to reason that QuickDraw should provide a general-purpose tool for copying data between PixMaps. The tool exists
and its name is CopyBits() . The name is held over from the old days
when monochrome pixels and bits in RAM were virtually interchangeable concepts. CopyBits() is an extremely powerful trap, having a
number of important features:
• Transfers pixels between pixel images, regardless of location
(onscreen or offscreen) or differences in bits per pixel. Operations
between PixMaps and BitMaps are fully supported.
• Automatically scales pixel values to account for differences between source and destination images.
• Supports all pen transfer modes.
• Transfer operations are extremely rapid, minimizing execution
time and flicker.
The number of embedded features and relatively fast performance
of CopyBits() has made it the trap of choice of many graphics programmers. There are a few other traps that perform pixel data processing
operations, but CopyBits() is by far the most important of them.
Figure 3-16 illustrates the work performed this trap.

Note~

.,.. Moving Pixels Around

149

Fg and Bg color
from thePort

8-----:

Source
Image
Data

I
I
I
I
I

,-----------------------

'I
I
I

Region
parameter

Transfer
mode

ITable or
searchProc
from GDevice

l-.00

Resulting
PixMap

j_
Vis and
clip regions
from port

Destination
rectangle
Destination
image data

Figure 3-16. CopyBits() functional process diagram

.,.. Introducing CopyBits()
In order to make good use of this trap, you have to roll up your
sleeves because there's a lot to get into. The interface to CopyBitsO is:
void CopyBits(
BitMap
*srcBits,
*dstBits,
BitMap
*srcRect,
Re ct
*dstRect,
Re ct
transferMode,
short
RgnHandle maskRgn } ;

150

.,. Chapter 3 Drawing in Color

The first two arguments are pointers to the source and destination
PixMaps or BitMaps. Listing 3-19 shows a routine that copies a picture
from an off-screen PixMap to a window on the screen.
Listing 3-19. Simple use of the CopyBits() trap
void MoveSomePixels(
PixMapHandle offscreenPM
WindowPtr

someWindow;

if (rampPM == NULL)
RETURN;
someWindow = FrontWindow();
if (someWindow == NULL)
RETURN;
/* CopyBits() requires these "standard" pen colors */
/* for "basic" pixel image transfers */
ForeColor( blackColor ) ;
BackColor( whiteColor ) ;
/* Note: PixMaps will need to be locked */
/* blast PixMap data into a window somewhere */
CopyBits(
*offscreenPM, *(((CGrafPtr)someWindow)->portPixMap),
&((**offscreenPM) .bounds), &(someWindow->portRect),
srcCopy, NULL ) ;

Notice that the destination PixMap has been extracted from a
WindowPtr and appropriately dereferenced. Realize that the window
might not be a color window! Fortunately, CopyBits() can recognize
this and convert the improper reference to a nonexistent PixMap into
the correct reference to the window's GrafPort BitMap. This feature is
necessary to provide compatibility with Classic QuickDraw.
The third and fourth arguments sent to CopyBits() are bounding
rectangles. They define the subset of the pixels in the source and
destination PixMaps, respectively. Recall the bounds field from the
definition of the PixMap structure. It describes not only the PixMap's
displayable area but its private coordinate system. The upper-left
corner of a PixMap's bounds rectangle determines the coordinates of
the first pixel in the PixMap, and the bottom-right coordinates describes the last visible pixel.

..,.. Moving Pixels Around

151

..,. Horizontal and Vertical Scaling
One of the more important features of CopyBits() is that it can be used
to scale the source pixel values into the destination PixMap' s rectangle. If the rectangles are of equal width and height, no such scaling
takes place. If the source rectangle width is greater than the destination rectangle, source pixel values will be omitted according to a
number of different rules in order to squeeze the source to fit inside
the destination. The ratio of horizontal and vertical dimensions between the source and destination rectangles is calculated as a fixedpoint decimal and appropriately rounded off for each destination
pixel value calculated. For example, if the source is twice as wide and
four times as tall as the destination, then the ratio is source[2 • 4] into
destination[l • l], which means that from the source, 2 horizontal and
4 vertical pixel values will be used to compute a single destination
pixel value. The nature of the computations depend on the QuickDraw
version and source pixel image.
1. 1-bit source PixMaps and BitMaps - QuickDraw will preserve
black values. If there is a single pixel value in the source pixel
sub-matrix, then the destination pixel value is black.
2. 2-bit and deeper source PixMaps - The upper-left source pixel
value is placed into the destination.

This is equally applicable to the relative heights of the source and
destination rectangles. The scaling effects are perhaps easier to understand visually, as shown in Figure 3-17.

Scaled horizontally

Scaled vertically

Figure 3- 17. Examples of CopyBits() spatial scaling

152

.,.. Chapter 3 Drawing in Color

~

Examples of Using CopyBits()
Simple examples will help you understand the interaction between a
PixMap's bounds rectangle and the "srcRect" argument in CopyBits().
Consider the code fragment in Listing 3-20, which sets up a PixMap
which describes an image that is four rows by four columns of 8-bit
deep pixels.
Listing 3-20. Creating another example indexed PixMap
void CreateindexedPixMap( void )
{

PixMapHandle
Rect
char
OSErr
long
short

srcPM;
pmBounds;
*pixBufPtr;
errStat;
nPixels;
i;

/* Allocate a new PixMap via our utility routines */
SetRect( &prnBounds, 0, 0, 4, 4 );
srcPM = PixMap_Create( &prnBounds, 8, &errStat );
/* always check for failure when allocating large */
/* data structures! */
if (errStat != noErr)
return;
/* assign pixel values */
/* pixel bytes = 4 pixels * 4 rows * (rowbytes I 8) */
pixBufPtr = (char*)GetPixBaseAddr( srcPM );
pixelBytes = 16;
for (i=O; i<pixelBytes; i++)
pixBufPtr[i] = (char)i;

Figure 3-18 shows what the contents of the PixMap's baseAddr
memory looks like. Figure 3-19 shows the same PixMap as it would
appear in a window.
Now let's examine what happens when the example PixMap's contents are copied using CopyBits(). Assume that the destination PixMap
is 8 by 8 and the upper-left corner of its coordinate system is anchored
at (0, 0). For the first example of a CopyBits() operation, let's consider
the simple pixel copy operation shown in Listing 3-21.

.,.. Moving Pixels Around

pixelSize = 8
bounds =0, 0, 4, 4
rowBytes = 4
baseAddr
~

pixel
index
values

o

0000 0000 low address
0000 0 0 0 1
2 0000 0 0 1 0
3 0000 -0011
4
0000 0 100
5 0000 0 1 0 1
6 0000 0 1 1 0
7
0000 0 1 1 1
0000 100 0
8
9 0000 1 0 0 1
10
0000 1 0 1 0
11
0000 1 0 1 1
12 0000 1 1 0 0
13 0000 1 1 0 1
14
0000 1 1 1 0
15 0000 1 1 1 1 higher address
. . . _ 8bits-.

Figure 3-18. SomeRoutineO PixMap contents (memory)

(O, O)
0 1 2 3
4 5 6 7 .....
8 9 10 11

•..iJ

12 13 14 15

14 41_

Figure 3-19. SomeRoutineO PixMap contents (in window)

153

154

~

Chapter 3 Drawing in Color

Listing 3-21. Copying all pixel values
/* Copy all pixels */
srcRect = (**srcPM) .bounds;
dstRect = srcRect;
CopyBits( *srcPM, *dstPM, &srcRect, &dstRec, srccopy, NULL);

Figure 3-20 shows the destination space before the CopyBits(); the
gray pixels represent whatever existed there before CopyBitsO was
called. Figure 3-21 shows the destination space after calling CopyBits().

••••••••
••••••••
••••••••

Legend

Ill =

unknown value

(8 8)

Figure 3-20. Before PixMap, CopyBits() example #1

~I

Figure 3-21. After PixMap, CopyBits() example #1

.,.. Moving Pixels Around

155

The result shouldn't be surprising, for two reasons: First, "srcRect"
was set equal to (**srcPM).bounds, which directed CopyBits() to use
all of the visible pixels in srcPM. Then "dstRect" was set equal to
srcRect, which directed CopyBits() to copy all source pixels into the
destination, without scaling.
Let's make it a little more interesting. Instead of setting srcRect
equal to (**srcPM).bounds as in the last example, let's use srcRect as a
window into the source PixMap as shown in Listing 3-22.
Listing 3-22. Copying only center pixel values
SetRect( &srcRect, 1, 1, 3, 3 );
dstRect = srcRect;
CopyBits( *srcPM, *dstPM, &srcRect, &dstRec, srcCopy, NULL ) ;

Figure 3-22 shows the results of this operation.

(0, O)

•••••••••••••
•••••••••••••
••••••••••••••••
••••••••••••••••
5
9

18 8l

Figure 3-22. PixMap results, CopyBits() example #2

The srcRect variable is used as a 2-by-2-pixel window into the source
PixMap. Setting srcRect to (1, 1, 3, 3) directed CopyBitsO to use the center
4 pixels because - and this is important - srcRect uses the coordinate
system as defined by the bounds rectangle of source PixMap; in this
case, (**srcPM).bounds is (0, 0, 4, 4), a 4-by-4 square anchored at (0, 0).
Figure 3-23 shows the relationship between srcRect and (**srcPM).bounds.
Let's make another minor change, as shown in Listing 3-23.

156

.,.. Chapter 3

Drawing in Color

1

3

(0, O)

-

src!R~ tra:Oct ~ogle
0 1 2 .].
4 5 6 7
8 9 10 11 ~ bo1 nd re tar gle
12 13 14 15

1

3

(4, 4)

T
Figure 3-23. PixMap results, CopyBits() example #3
Listing 3-23. Copying the source's center into the upper-left corner
SetRect( &srcRect, l, 1, 3, 3 );
dstRect = srcRect;
OffsetRect( &dstRect, 0, 3 ) ;
CopyBits( *srcPM, *dstPM, &srcRect, &dstRec, srcCopy, NULL ) ;

This time, instead of making srcRect and dstRect equal, we set
dstRect to be the same size (2 by 2) as srcRect, but now it's anchored
at (1, 4) instead of (1, 1). Figure 3-24 illustrates what happens.
(0, O)

-·

Ii Ii

•••••••••••

••••••••••
===
•1•1•
• s• ••••
5

••••••••••••••
••••••••
9 10

-.

JJI ...Ill

Figure 3-24. PixMap results, CopyBits() example #4

~

Moving Pixels Around

157

..,.. Performance Considerations
These examples should give you an idea of how CopyBits() can be
used to transfer and scale pixel images in horizontal dimensions. A
pixel image can also be treated as a three-dimensional beast: The
coordinates (x, y, z) map into (horizontal, vertical, pixel value). Figure
3-25 hints at this three-dimensional nature.

,_,

____ ------.;.

Figure 3-25. Profile of a grayscale image

In Chapter 7, we examine how CopyBits() can be used to transform
pixel images in the z (pixel value) dimension. When CopyBits() calls
are made using a srcCopy transfer mode, a black foreground color,
and a white background color, transformations in the pixel value
dimension are effectively suppressed.
·
The routines employed to transfer blocks of raw pixel data between
video and nonvideo RAM are commonly referred to as blitters. A pixelblitting routine has to be fast. The processing of pixel images naturally
involves nested loops something like those shown in Listing 3-24.
Listing 3-24. Framework for a blitting routine
void PixBlitter( void )
{

register Ptr
register short

curPixelPtr ; / * hopefully this group * /
pixelSize , i ; / * gets in registers * /

reg i ster Ptr
register l ong
regis t er short

curPixelPtr ;
bytesPerRow ;
j ;

/ * if these make it , * /
/ * even better */

158

.,.. Chapter 3

Drawing in Color

boundsR;

Rect

/* determine number of bytes in each row of pixels */
/* include pixels outside to the right of the bounds rect */
bytesPerRow =
(long) ((**pm) .bounds.right - (**pm) .bounds.left) *
(long) (pm.rowBytes & Ox7FFF);
/* account for the number of bytes per pixel value */
/* multiply before divide, please */
bytesPerRow = ( (bytesPerRow * 8) I (**pm) .pixelDepth;
/* determine increment for */
/* must be non-negative */
pixelSize = (**pm) .pixelDepth;
if (pixelSize <= 8)
pixelSize
l;
else
pixelSize
pixelSize I 8;
startAddr = (**pm) .baseAddr;
for (j=boundsR.top; j<boundsR.bottom; j++)
{

curPixelPtr = startRowAddr;
/* process a row of pixel values */
for (i=boundsR.left; i<boundsR.right; i++)
{

/*

do interesting pixel operations here ••• */

/*
I*

if resolution is less than 8 bits per pixel ••• */
do multiple pixels at a time ••• */

/* advance current pixel pointer */
curPixelPtr = curPixelPtr + pixelSize;

/* advance the row pointer */
startRowAddr = startRowAddr + bytesPerRow;

.,... Moving Pixels Around

159

The primary influence upon a blitter' s performance is the number of
CPU cycles executed in the innermost loop. This generally means
writing code that generates a small number of simple instructions. For
example the DIV (divide) is an order of magnitude slower than the
LSR (rotate right) instruction. If a blitter' s innermost loop needed to
perform division by an integral power of 2, then performing the
divide by right-shifting would yield much shorter execution time than
using a "plain" divide operator. Adds, subtracts, and bit-shifting operations are all preferable to multiplication and division.
The blitting routine shown in Listing 3-24 is meant only to illustrate
the complex nature of copying pixel images. For most applications,
you shouldn't feel the need to write such a routine. But understanding
the basics of blitting operations should help you when writing routines that examine the pixel image data contained within PixMaps and
BitMaps.
In terms of raw execution speed, CopyBits() performs impressively.
The performance is even more impressive when you consider the
number of operations that it can perform just by varying the pen
mode and rectangle arguments. As expected, the complex multi-mode
functionqlity of CopyBits() consumes more CPU than using a customized blitting routine. So how does an application avoid an unnecessary large performance penalty when using CopyBits()?
• Force long word alignment between source and destination images - See the section on PixMap alignment in the next chapter.
• Don't colorize - Using pen colors other than black and white for
the foreground and background slows CopyBits() down consider·
ably.
• Don't scale - Scaling occurs when copying between rectangles of
unequal sizes and means extra inner integer or fixed point multiplications. Use source and destination rectangles of equal dimensions.
• Use equal resolutions - PixMap resolutions factor into the scaling equation; differences in resolution will cause scaling and
engender added calculations. CopyBits() is actually ignorant of
resolution and effectively factors resolution against the source
and destination rectangles.
• Transfer between PixMaps of equal depth - This should be
obvious. Converting between pixel depths involves some amount
of extra instructions to round off, truncate, or sign-extend pixel
values.

160

~

Chapter 3 Drawing in Color

• Use srcCopy mode - Since the destination pixel values can be
ignored, fast move operations can be employed. The other logical
pen modes are somewhat slower. Arithmetic operations are by
nature computation-intensive, and they slow down CopyBits()
and other transfer operations considerably.
• Make source PixMap and the destination GDevice have identical ColorTables - For the purposes of color mapping, all direct
PixMaps have identical ColorTables. As mentioned earlier in this
chapter, indexed ColorTables are equivalent if they have the same
ctSeedvalue.
• Don't clip the destination - Pass CopyBits() NULL for
"maskRgn" arguments. Clipping may occur when copying into a
destination PixMap that happens to belong to the current GrafPort.
Clipping occurs if either the mask or clip region intersects the
destination rectangle.
• Remove all installed search procedures - Search procedures
slow CopyBits() down considerably if installed on the current
GDevice.

I By the Way ..,. I

.,,.. PixMap Resolution and Patching the StdBits()
Bottleneck
You may recall that there are two fields, hRes and vRes, that indicate
the PixMap's resolution. These hold two 32-bit fixed-point values that
indicate the number of pixels per inch. These values are important,
but they are particularly important when copying between PixMaps
of differing resolutions. The typical resolution of a "native" Macintosh
PixMap is 72 dpi; however many imported pixel images contain
PixMaps of 300 dpi or greater.

IJJJ>

Moving Pixels Around

161

In order to properly account for differences in resolution between
PixMaps, an application can employ a small number of tricks. One is
to scale all rectangle coordinates before passing them on to CopyBits().
An arbitrary sub-rectangle in a 72-dpi PixMap is about one-sixteenth
as pixel-data-dense as the same-size rectangle in a 300-dpi PixMap.
Therefore, a rectangle in a 300-dpi source should be copied and its
lower-right coordinates scaled down by a factor of 7%00 relative to the
upper-left coordinates in order to use it as an appropriate destination
in a 72-dpi PixMap. Alternatively, all four of the rectangle's coordinates could be inset to center-justify the source image within the
destination.
Another alternative is to patch the GrafPort's StdBits() bottleneck
procedure with one that scales the destination rectangle whenever
copying between PixMaps of differing resolutions. Listing 3-25 shows
an example of such a patch and its installation.

Listing 3-25. Making StdBits() account for "nonstandard" resolutions
pascal void StdBitsProc_Resolutionindependent(
BitMap
*sourceBits,
Rect
*sourceR,
Rect
*destR,
short
transferMode,
RgnHandle maskRgn )
Re ct
Fixed
long
Boolean

newSourceR, newDestR;
seventyTwo, sourceRes, destRes;
width, height; /* long to avoid calculation overflow */
sourceisPM, destisPM;

/* modify a copy of rectangles, not the originals */
newSourceR = *sourceR;
newDestR = *destR;
/* check to see if one of the BitMaps is a PixMap */
sourceisPM = ((sourceBits->rowBytes & Ox8000) == Ox8000);
destisPM = ((destBits->rowBytes & Ox8000) == Ox8000);
if (sourceisPM I I destisPM)
{

/* equal to FixRatio( 72, 1 ) */
sourceRes = Ox48000000;
destRes = Ox48000000;

162

..,_ Chapter 3

Drawing in Color

/* horizontally scale the destination and source rects */
i f ( sourceisPM)

sourceRes = ((PixMap*)sourceBits)->hRes;
if (destisPM)
destRes = ((PixMap*)destBits)->hRes;
if (sourceRes != destRes)
{

width = sourceR->right - sourceR->left;
width = FixRound( width * FixDiv( destRes, sourceRes ) ) ;
newDestR.right = newDestR.left +width;

/* vertically scale the destination and source rects */
if (sourceisPM)
sourceRes = ((PixMap*)sourceBits)->vRes;
i f (destrsPM)
destRes = ((PixMap*)destBits)->vRes;
if (sourceRes != destRes)
height = sourceR->bottorn - sourceR->top;
height = FixRound( height * FixDiv( destRes, sourceRes ) ) ;
newDestR.bottorn = newDestR.top + height;

StdBits( sourceBits, &newSourceR, &newDestR, transferMode,
rnaskRgn );

/*

**install custom CopyBits() proc into a CGrafPort or GrafPort,
**or standard StdBits() proc if "newBitsProc" argument is NULL.
*/

void InstallBitsProc(
CGrafPtr theCurPort,
Ptr
newBitsProc
CQDProcs
QDProcs
Boolean

stdCQDProcs, *newCQDProcsPtr;
stdQDProcs, *newQDProcsPtr;
isColorPort;

if (theCurPort == NULL)
theCurPort = (CGrafPtr)thePort;

..,. Summary

/* check for color or b&w GrafPort */
isColorPort = ( (theCurPort->portVersion & OxCOOO)

163

OxCOOO) ;

if (theCurPort->grafProcs == NULL)
{

if (isColorPort)
{

newCQDProcsPtr = (CQDProcsPtr)NewPtr( sizeof(CQDProcs) ) ;
SetStdCProcs( newCQDProcsPtr ) ;
theCurPort->grafProcs = newCQDProcsPtr;
else
newQDProcsPtr = (QDProcsPtr)NewPtr( sizeof(QDProcs) ) ;
SetStdProcs( newQDProcsPtr ) ;
theCurPort->grafProcs = newQDProcsPtr;

if (newBitsProc != NULL)
/* install custom proc */
theCurPort->grafProcs->bitsProc
else

newBitsProc;

/* install "standard" proc */
i f (isColorPort)
{

SetStdCProcs( &stdCQDProcs ) ;
theCurPort->grafProcs->bitsProc

stdCQDProcs.bitsProc;

else
SetStdProcs( &stdQDProcs );
theCurPort->grafProcs->bitsProc

~

stdQDProcs.bitsProc;

Summary
This chapter introduced Color QuickDraw and 32-bit QuickDraw,
along with the basic color theory needed to support the context of
color functionality. The salient difference between Classic QuickDraw
and Color QuickDraw is the use of multi-bit pixels that allow for color
programming.

164

~

Chapter 3 Drawing in Color

The chapter also presented the two color models that Color
QuickDraw supports, indexed and direct. The indexed color model is
the most commonly used pixel type; it uses a ColorTable to store a list
of available colors. The direct color model does not require a ColorTable
because each pixel value contains color information. The chapter also
presented the GDevice as the data structure for defining a color model
and the resulting organization of pixel memory.
QuickDraw's major data structure for handling pixel images is the
PixMap, which describes the organization of raster images in Macintosh memory. The PixMap is the extension of the Classic QuickDraw's
BitMap structure. Copying images from PixMap to PixMap is accomplished by using CopyBits().
The next chapter examines these concepts in greater depth; the
emphasis in this chapter was on basic practical information. Chapter 4
describes how palettes work and how more control can be exerted in
the color mapping process.

4

Display Control and
Offscreen Drawing

In Chapters 2 and 3, we explored many of the fundamental Classic
QuickDraw and Color QuickDraw concepts, data structures, and traps.
This chapter focuses on integrating those concepts to produce a useful
and practical foundation on which graphics can be rendered and
displayed in a robust, flicker-free manner, with a minimum of programming effort.
Because Macintosh systems have a wide variety of display hardware
configurations, graphics applications must strive to be as independent
of the video display hardware as possible while simultaneously taking
maximum advantage of the available graphics hardware resources.
The chapter title reflects the relationship between these two goals .

..,. The Need for Drawing Offscreen
At a minimum, it's fair to say that the QuickDraw environment provides basic graphics functionality. But the ability to draw text and
shapes just isn't enough for most commercial-grade Macintosh applications, which demand solid, unhesitating responses to mouse and
keyboard actions. The ability to render complex graphics offscreen
and transfer the results onscreen quickly is an essential part of computer graphics presentation and is well-supported by the Macintosh
Graphics Toolbox. In order to understand the relationship between
graphics software and hardware architectures, a quick video overview
is in order.

165

166

~

Chapter 4

lill>

Display Control and Offscreen Drawing

Video Display Overview
The hardware that converts pixel values in video memory into analog
signals is called digital-to-analog hardware (DI A). A single video image
is called a frame. A single line of drawn pixels is called a scan line. The
period of time between reaching the end of a one scan line and start of
drawing on the next scan line is called the horizontal blanking interval, or
hblank. The period in time between reaching the end of the last scan line
and start of drawing on the first scan line of the next frame is called
the vertical blanking interval, or vblank. Figure 4-1 illustrates the blanking intervals relative to the scan pattern of a typical video display.

horizontal blank interval (1 to 2)

Figure 4-1. Video display scan pattern

Of particular interest is the vb lank interval. Realize that CPU's
operate rates (8-50 megahertz, or million cycles per second) are much
faster than those of video displays, where each frame is redrawn
every Y3o of a second. It's not only possible but desirable to update
display characteristics between video frames or fields to ensure smooth
transition between frames.
lill>

Causes of Flicker
Even though hardware performance increases are regularly doing
wonders for even the most sluggish, convoluted application, the video
rate bottleneck remains. The speed mismatch between CPUs and video
display is the source of great difficulty. The problems start with the

~

The Need for Offscreen Drawing

167

fact that most video memory is accessed through shared address lines.
The flicker problem manifests itself when the DI A hardware that
controls a monitor also tries to read that same video memory. There's
no problem if the monitor is in its vblank or hblank, because the DI A
hardware isn't reading the video memory. If the D/ A is reading while
the bus is also trying to write or read the same memory, flicker results.
The Macintosh CPU and bus hardware, through the marvels of hardware bus arbitration logic, are kept from interfering with each other
when reading or writing memory at nearly the same time. The problem is resolved by delaying all bus access to video memory until
vertical or horizontal blank, thereby avoiding flicker due to access
during the nonblanking intervals.
The most common cause of video flicker is the double-drawing of
pixel values. Applications that fail to optimize their rendering methods often flicker noticeably during window updates and mouse tracking. Many of these flicker-producing techniques are common:
completely erasing a window before drawing its contents, xor-ing a
shape during a sketching loop, and so on. But even the most basic
sequences of graphic operations can cause flicker due to doubledrawing pixels: Consider the example in Figure 4-2, which shows how
flicker affects graphics that track the current mouse position .
.... 1 EraseRect ( &oldPosR ) ;

..--~

2

Because the positions
overlap, moving from 1 to 2
causes flicker when drawing
directly on screen.

. . .-

2 DrawNewFigure(
.. &offScreenPixels,
&newPosR, ) ;

The pixels in the
intersecting region are
erased then redrawn,
causing flicker.

Figure 4-2. Example of flickering from mouse tracking graphics

Flicker is caused by the pixels in the intersection of the shape at the
last position and the new position being erased and then redrawn
with the desired graphic. It would be desirable to have operations that
change onscreen pixel values more than once to buffer those writes,
but few display cards have this capability. Display cards simply lack

168

~

Chapter 4

Display Control and Offscreen Drawing

the raw execution speed necessary to process pixel images at video
rates, unless the destination image is small and whose computation
doesn't involve horizontal, vertical, or pixel value scaling.
The flicker problem is inherent in most commercial microcomputer
video architectures, not just the Macintosh. The preferred methodol. ogy to eliminate flicker, one favored by most graphics applications,
involves performing all drawing operations to an offscreen pixel
memory buffer, and then copying the buffer contents into the active
video display controller's video memory in a single operation. Figure
4-3 illustrates this process.
This technique is known by a number of names; we're going to call
it simply offscreen drawing.
PixMap
1
2

2

~

UnionRect( &oldPosR,
&newPosR, &updatR );
DrawNewFigureOffscreen(
&offScreen Pixels,
&updatR);

Window
1

2

~

CopyBits(
*offScreenPixels,
*(((CGrafPtr)window)->
portPixMap) ,
&offscreenBoundsR,
&updateR,
srcCopy,
NULL ) ;

Figure 4-3. Offscreen drawing procedure

..,,. Basic Offscreen Drawing Procedure
Graphics-intensive applications must adapt to a wide range of display
configurations. The main tenet of offscreen drawing is the "decoupling"
of the software components that perform image rendering and image
display. Another important consideration is to rasterize graphic objects as close to display device itself. This technique involves the
creation of an offscreen graphics software environment that models
closely the ideal hardware configuration, without imposing the restraints of a physical graphics device.
The primary limitations of offscreen graphics are the availability of
memory and maximum allowable execution time. Image buffers are

~

The Need for Offscreen Drawing

169

memory hogs, and rasterizing and pixel image transfer operations are
very execution-intensive. An effective offscreen drawing procedure must
deal with these two limitations in great detail and with flexibility.
The GDevice was designed to facilitate graphics software/hardware
independence by placing a device driver between application software and low-level graphics hardware control. The important tasks
that the GDevice driver carries out are handling the lowest levels
color mapping and pixel memory addressing. The GDevice scheme is
also designed to arbitrate color requests in offscreen pixel images,
where hardware limitations don't apply. These functions are to be
carried out with a minimum effect on execution speed, if only because
the sheer magnitude of image data tends to magnify execution overhead. A device driver is also expected to simplify for application
software the tasks related to hardware device 1/0, which most applications depend upon heavily. For example, tasks like file and screen
reads and writes.
In these respects, the GDevice driver specification is both sufficient
and sensible. Most of the time, applications barely have to concern
themselves with the current state of the display hardware. Unfortunately, the addition of GDevices to the support of offscreen drawing is
neither simple nor transparent, and requires no small amount of
careful programming. Using CGrafPorts and GDevices together with
their associated data structures to create offscreen graphics buffers is
one of the most confounding tasks of QuickDraw programming. Additionally, there is duplication of important information between
GDevices and CGrafPorts, particularly boundary rectangles, pixel maps,
and ColorTables. The steps for creating an offscreen graphics environment from scratch proceed as follows:
1. If the graphics to be rendered differ from the monitor that they

will be displayed on, then a "private" GDevice is necessary.
Create one using NewGDevice(). Save the current GDevice reference and make the newly created GDevice the current one.
2. Initialize the GDevice's PixMap. Assign the pixelSize field to the
desired pixel depth and bounds rectangle to the desired area.
Compute the rowBytes based on the pixel size and bounding
rectangle. Allocate enough memory to accommodate the desired
image (using NewPtrO or NewHandle()).
3. If the indexed color model is desired, create and install a
ColorTable into the GDevice's PixMap. Then create and install an
inverse table using MakeITable().

170

.,.. Chapter 4

Display Control and Offscreen Drawing

4. Create a CGrafPort with OpenCPort() and make it the current
port, using SetPort(). Copy the current GDevice's PixMapHandle
into the CGrafPort's PixMap via CopyPixMap().
5. Whenever drawing is to be performed offscreen, save the current
GDevice and CGrafPort, make current the private GDevice and
CGrafPort, draw, and restore the original GDevice and CGrafPort
when finished with the drawing operations.
As you can see, this is a fairly involved procedure, given that each
one of these steps involves significant calculation and error checking.
~

GWorlds
Apple recognized the complexity of this data structure concerto and
the associated programming difficulties. With the release of 32-bit
QuickDraw version 1.0's Graphics World paradigm, simply known as
GWorlds, Apple introduced a simple and powerful alternative to the
laborious offscreen drawing process described in the previous section.
A GWorld contains a CGrafPort, a PixMap, a ColorTable, and a GDevice;
the details of managing them are neatly encapsulated (hidden away)
in a handful of routines contained in the 32-bit QuickDraw package.
It's important to understand the roles of each of the four component
data structures: those roles will be discussed in greater detail later in
this chapter. But for now, let's concentrate on basic GWorlds usage. It
may help you to think of a GWorld as a sort of "super" CGrafPort
with its own private GDevice sharing a commcm PixMap.

Note..,.

You may be wondering how GWorlds can work in noncolor
QuickDraw environments. As of System 7 QuickDraw version
1.3, GWorlds are implemented for monochrome QuickDraw. This
capability greatly reduces the need for special-case graphics code.
Now, with much less effort than ever before, you can write generalized, Macintosh-model-independent graphics code .

..,. Using GWorlds
GWorlds are primarily used as a drawing area associated with a
particular window. This isn't a requirement: A GWorld may be used
simply as a "private" drawing area without being attached to any
particular window.

..,. GWorlds

171

A list of the most important GWorld traps, and descriptions of how
to use them effectively, follows. The more esoteric GWorld facilities
will be addressed in later chapters.
Creating a GWorld
pascal QDErr NewGWorld(
GWorldPtr
*offscreenGWorld, /* Note: a Var pararn in Pascal */
short
pixelDepth,
Rect
*boundsRect,
CTabHandle cTable,
aGDevice,
GDHandle
long
gdFlags ) ;

The NewGWorld() trap is used to allocate and initialize a GWorld. It
returns a Ptr (not a Handle) to the new GWorld and may also be cast
(or type-coerced) as a CGrafPtr and treated as such. This trap passes
back a return value that indicates whether or not the requested GWorld
could be created.
Changing a GWorld
pascal GWorldFlags UpdateGWorld(
GWorldPtr
*offscreenGWorld, /* Note: a Var param in Pascal */
short
pixelDepth,
Rect
*boundsRect,
CTabHandle cTable,
GDHandle
aGDevice,
gdFlags ) ;
long

This trap is used to reconfigure an existing GWorld. It's most commonly used to change either the pixel depth or ColorTable, but it can
be employed to change other GWorld characteristics as well.
Handling GWorld Components
pascal void GetGWorld(
CGrafPtr *port,
/* Note: a Var pararn in Pascal */
GDHandle *gdh );
/*Note: another Var pararn in Pascal*/
pascal void SetGWorld(
CGrafPtr port,
GDHandle gdh ) ;

As with GrafPorts, QuickDraw maintains a current GWorld, which
is the combination of the current CGrafPort and GDevice. These two

172

1111-

Chapter 4 Display Control and Offscreen Drawing

traps perform the appropriate Get/SetGDevice() and Get/SetPort()
calls. If the CGrafPtr argument passed to SetGWorld() is in fact a
GWorldPtr, then NULL can be passed for the GDHandle argument:
SetGWorld() will obtain the GDevice reference from the GWorld itself.
pascal PixMap Handle GetGWorldPixMap (
GWorldPtr
offscreenGWorld ) ;
pascal GDHandle GetGWorldDeyice (
GWorldPtr
offscreenGWor l d ) ;

These traps return Handles to the GWorld's associated PixMap and
GDevice, respectively. The PixMapHandle is commonly required for
the CopyBits() call that transfers the GWorld contents to the display
in response to an update event.
Note.,..

GetGWorldPixMapO has been completely dysfunctional in Color
QuickDraw versions 1.2 and <:>Ider. Fortunately, the PixMap reference can be obtained direcdy from a GWorldPtr by type-coercing
it to a CGrafPort, as shown in Listing 4-1.
The System Software 6.0.7 release has actually fixed this release;
unfortunately, the QuickDraw version number is still 1.2. In other
words, some version 1.2s have a working version of this trap and
some do not, so it's best to assume that all Color Quicl<Draw version 1.29' are broken in this respect.
Listing 4-1. Obtaining a GWorld's PixMapHandle
Pi xMapHandl e BetterGetGWorldPixMap(
GWorldPtr
aGWorld )
short
qdVersionID
PixMapHandle
Boolean

theGWPixMapHdl ;
isTrapBroken ;

isTrapBroken = (qdVersionID <= Ox0102) ;
if (isTrapBroken)
/* prefer using GetGWorldPixMap (), but it's broken, so ... * /
theGWP ixMapHdl = ( (CGrafPort)aGWorld ) ->portP i xMap ;
else
/ *in System 7 . 0 QuickDraw versions, we can do this instead * /

~

theGWPixMapHdl

GWorlds

173

= GetGWorldPixMap( aGWorld ) ;

return theGWPixMapHdl;

Disposing of a GWorld
pascal void DisposeGWorld (
GWorldPtr offscreenGWorld );

Use the DisposeGWorld() trap to dispose of all memory allocated
by NewGWorld().
~

More GWorld Techniques
The traps just presented were described as briefly as possible in order
to convey the essence of GWorlds as concisely as possible. GWorlds
have a number of other important features that will become important
to you once you've started implementing your own GWorld-based
applications.
Handling GWorld Errors

An application must be prepared to deal with the failure of most
GWorld traps. It's not that GWorlds are unreliable; in fact, the traps
are quite robust. However, GWorlds are quite hardware-resourcehungry and any code that relies on the availability of memory, disk
space, or other such facilities absolutely must be prepared to handle a
lack of them, both gracefully and clearly. To be more specific, an
application that relies on GWorlds to perform double-buffered updates from offscreen should be prepared to draw directly t.o the screen
should the necessary GWorld be unavailable. The Menu Manager uses
offscreen buffering to save and restore the pixel values under a menu.
When the Menu Manager cannot geet enough memory for the offscreen
image buffer, it invalidates the area behind the menu to cause the
update events necessary to redraw the screen, one window at a time.
GWorlds and their associated offscreen PixMaps usually require
huge gobs of memory. The return values from NewGWorld() and
UpdateGWorld() should always be checked for success. To give you
an idea of how likely a NewGWorld() failure is, ponder this tidbit: A
512-by-512-pixel by 32-bits-per-pixel PixMap requires a one megabyte
RAM allocation. How many GWorld-based, deep-pixel windows can
your Macintosh handle?

174

~

Chapter 4

Display Control and Offscreen Drawing

So how should an application check the return values? The return
values from GWorld traps indicate more than just execution failure or
success. Under successful circumstances, the values should be interpreted as a bit-mapped flag value, with individual bits indicating
actions that were undertaken to fulfill the request implied by the
incoming trap arguments. The error bit is one of these bits: if set, the
rest of the flag value can be interpreted as a bona fide error value.
Listing 4-2 shows an example of how to process these return values.
Listing 4-2. Example of testing for GWorld errors
OSErr ChangeAGWorld(
GWorldPtr
someGW,
short
newPixDepth
Rect
OSErr
GWorldFlags

newBoundsR;
errStat;
newGWFlags, curGWFlags;

SetRect( &newBoundsR, 0, 0, 1024, 1024 );
curGWFlags = alignPix I stretchPix I newDepth;
/* go off and (try to) update the GWorld */
newGWFlags =
UpdateGWorld(
&someGW, newPixDepth, &newBoundsR,
(CTabHandle)NULL, (GDHandle)NULL, curGWFlags ) ;
/* determine if the last trap call failed */
if ((newGWFlags & gwFlagErr) == OL)
/* success */
errStat = noErr;
else
/* failure: mask out the error bit to get */
/* actual error value */
errStat = newGWFlags & -gwFlagErr;

return errStat;

This is certainly more involved than, say, checking a file system error.

.,. GWorlds

175

Using NewGWorld() and UpdateGWorld()
The NewGWorld() and UpdateGWorld() traps each have six arguments,
with certain combinations having special meanings. Therefore, the
assignment and usage of the following arguments must be carefully
understood before you use the NewGWorld() and UpdateGWorld()
traps:
• "offscreenGWorld" - There's no mystery here, just pass in the
address of an unallocated or allocated existing GWorldPtr variable to NewGWorld() and UpdateGWorld(), respectively.
• "pixelDepth" - This value needs to be a valid pixel depth. Zero
is a special value that can be passed to NewGWorld(). It directs
NewGWorld() to use the depth of the deepest display GDevice
intersecting the "boundsRect" argument. The treatment of the
"boundsRect" argument is the same as performed by the
GetMaxDevice() trap.
• "boundsRect" -This value specifies the height, width, and coordinate system of the GWorld, just as every other QuickDraw
bounds rect does.
• "cTable" and "aGDevice" - Most of the time a NULL value
should be passed for these arguments. The primary exception to
this guideline is when an application needs to change the colors
available inside an indexed GWorld, that is, a GWorld with a
pixel depth of 8 or less. It's perfectly allowable to allocate a
private GDevice and assign it to the GWorld, but the creation and
maintenance of a GDevice is one of the more important laborsaving features of a GWorld. Of course, you're (fairly) free to do
what you want in the context of your application.
• "gdFlags" - This flag value should be composed by or-ing together one or more of the defined GWorldFlag constants. These
should specify the desired GWorld attributes, as documented in
Inside Macintosh, Volume VI.
Make sure that there is enough heap memory to hold an entire
duplicate of a GWorld before passing it to UpdateGWorld(). This trap
calls NewGWorld() to duplicate the GWorld itself, calls CopyBits() to
transfer the pixel values, and then disposes the original GWorld.

176

~

Chapter 4 Display Control and Offscreen Drawing

Important..,..

There are problems associated with checking some of these flag
bits in Color QuickDraw versions 1.2 and earlier. However, the
error bit is always set appropriately.
Additionally, early versions of UpdateGWorld() have been known
to corrupt the GWorld's clipping region and ColorTable.
Stretch, Clip, and Dither

These flag bits specify how UpdateGWorld() will change the pixel
image when converting between ColorTable, geometry (horizontal
and vertical scaling), and pixel size. The effects of such operations are
discussed at length in Chapter 7.
PixMap A lignment

The concept of memory alignment was mentioned briefly in the previous chapter. Now we will discuss it more fully.
The architecture of the 68000 family of processors (as well as most
others) facilitates the fastest transfer of memory values when the
source and destination addresses are aligned on 16-bit (even byte) or
32-bit (multiple of 4 byte) addresses. On Macintoshes, memory and
bus transfers operate the fastest if both addresses are even multiples
of 4 bytes, that is, if neither of the two low address bits are ones.
Figure 4-4 shows examples of aligned and non-aligned addresses.
The notion of memory alignment is of particular importance to
graphics processing because of the large number of pixel-blitting operations and the vast amount of data associated with each operation.
GWorlds have a built-in provision to realign their image buffers to
their display destination. The "whichFlags" argument to UpdateGWorld()
has an alignPix bit, which, if set, will cause the trap to realign the
image buffer via the following mechanism: A little-known detail about
GWorld PixMaps is that each row of pixel values is actually 4 bytes
longer than the allocation request called for and is accounted for in
the PixMap's rowBytes value. This leeway allows UpdateGWorld() to
shift around the bits of each row without having to completely reallocate the PixMap.

.,..

GWorlds

SOURCE

DESTINATION

Offscreen PixMap (unaligned)

Window->portPixMap (aligned)
0

012345

123456789

Copy bits works more slowly when a
source image is not aligned on 4 byte
boundaries relative to the destination.

\.

012345

177

t

The realigned PixMap
can be copied into
the window more quickly.

/

The extra 4 byte
buffer allows
a GWorld's
PixMap image
to be realigned

Figure 4-4. Address alignment
Purgeable and Locked PixMaps
During the execution of an image processing application it often
becomes necessary to use temporary image buffers. That's all fine and
dandy, but we already know what memory hogs pixel images can be,
so the use of temporary image buffers can be somewhat dicey: They
must be disposed of as soon as they're no longer needed - you just
can't leave them around.
This is the same problem encountered with the Resource Manager,
and like resources, GWorld PixMaps can be made purgeable. In fact,
an application can allocate temporary PixMaps "permanently" by
simply making them purgeable. Additionally, they can be made to live
in MultiFinder memory.

178

~

Chapter 4

Display Control and Offscreen Drawing

Of course, not much in the computational world comes for free, and
memory is no exception. If a drawing operation is attempted on a
purged PixMap, the application will almost certainly die, either immediately or real soon. Therefore, an application must take extra precautions when using purgeable PixMaps. The likelihood that a purgeable
PixMap is in fact purged depends on what else is going on in the
application, or in the case of MultiFinder memory-based PixMaps, in
other applications, too. The likelihood increases with every memory
allocation made. In short, an application must always check the validity of a purgeable PixMap and make sure that the image buffer
doesn't get purged for the entire time that the image itself is required.
Another important related GWorld fact is that its PixMaps differ
from other PixMaps in that their image buffers can be relocatable.
Such PixMaps have a baseAddr value that is actually a master pointer
value belonging to a Handle. This means that they need to be locked
while drawing in or with them so that they aren't relocated by the
Memory Manager in the middle of the drawing operation itself.
If an application needs to "walk the PixMap," or to access the image
buffer directly, then it will need to use the GetPixBaseAddress() and
PixMap32Bit() traps. Examples of using these traps are presented in
Chapter 9.
~

GWorld Usage Summary
With a slight excursion into the world of GWorld programming behind you, it should be fairly obvious that GWorlds offer a masterful
combination of functional richness and flexibility in a relatively simple
and compact framework. There are few areas of the Macintosh Toolbox
that provide such comprehensive functionality without burdening
you with needing to become acquainted with numerous data structures and traps .

..,. Application Display Control
~

Rules about Changing GDevice Settings
Version 1.2 of 32-bit QuickDraw added the ability of applications to
control the pixel depth and color I grayscale characteristics of screen
(public) GDevices. But just because a monitor can be reconfigured on
the fly doesn't mean that applications should do so indiscriminately.
The purpose of this facility is to allow applications to provide an

.,.. Application Display Control

179

alternative means of control for the user (not the application), rather
than force them to use the Monitors Control Panel Device. There
should be no need for applications to make these changes without
explicit instruction from the user.
lili>-

Using HasDepth() and SetDepth()
32-bit QuickDraw provides two traps for controlling display characteristics:
pascal short HasDepth(
GDHandle
gdh,
short
pixelDepth,
short
attributeFlags,
long
modeFlags ) ;
pascal OSErr SetDepth(
GDHandle
gdh,
short
pixelDepth,
attributeFlags,
short
long
modeFlags ) ;

These traps facilitate the testing and setting of a GDevice's pixel
depth and color I grayscale characteristics. The arguments hold the
same meaning for both traps. The "gdh" is the display GDevice to
reconfigure; private GDevices can be set to any valid pixel depth or
color map. The "pixelDepth" should be an appropriate pixel depth.
The "attributeFlags" are the same as those passed to a NewGDevice()
call. As of Color QuickDraw version 1.2, only the "gdDevType" flag
bit has a defined meaning, so until future functionality is added to
these traps, pass only that flag bit for this argument. The "modeFlags"
should be zero if grayscale, or 1 if color.
When HasDepth() is called, it queries the GDevice's driver to determine whether the depth/color request can be handled, returning the
corresponding mode value if the request is valid, or zero if the request
cannot be handled. The mode value is insignificant, as SetDepth()
accepts the same depth and color mode arguments.
When SetDepth() is called, it attempts to perform the depth and/ or
color mode change. It returns "noErr'' (zero) if successful, or an appropriate error value, typically a "cDepthErr" (-157) or "cParmErr" (-158). If
the pixel depth and color modes are already in effect, no action is
taken and "noErr" is returned.
The basic calling sequence is shown in Listing 4-3.

180

~

Chapter 4 Display Control and Offscreen Drawing

Listing 4-3. Example of using HasDepthO and SetDepthO
void DepthCharger( void
{

GDHandle
short
OS Err

theMainGD;
newPixDepth, neWColorMode, depthModeID;
errStat;

/* let's try to set the main screen to 8-bit color*/
theMainGD = GetMainDevice();
newPixDepth = 8;
newColorMode = 1;
depthModeID = HasDepth(
theMainGD, newPixDepth, 1 << gdDevType, newColorMode ) ;
/*if HasDepth() says OK, then update the device as requested*/
/* make sure that menu highlighting is off */
if (depthModeID != 0)
errStat = SetDepth(
theMainGD, newPixDepth, 1 << gdDevType, newColorMode );

There are few video cards that can handle all valid pixel depths and
color I grayscale combinations, making the error checking all the more
important.
A quirky side effect of SetDepth() is that any menu bar highlighting
will get messed up. If the depth change is the result of a menu
command, then the application should unhighlight the menu bar via a
HiliteMenu( 0 ) call .

...,. The Palette Manager
The indexed display model presents a number of problems when
taken in context to the Desktop' s multi-window, multi-application
environment. The most important issue to resolve is the assignment of
displayable colors to windows. Suppose that we have four applications running under MultiFinder, with each application displaying
four windows, each of which contains a picture with 64 unique colors,
as shown in Figure 4-5. Any time the user has more than one window
open that contains graphics, chances are that the total number of
colors requested by those windows will exceed the 256 possible in an
8-bit system (by far the most common color environment).

~

The Palette Manager

181

Figure 4-5. Windows with too many color requests
Using simple arithmetic, we can see that 4 x 4 x 64 equals 1024
colors, which is 768 more than 256, or four times the number of available
colors on any indexed GDevice. This is called color contention, which is
a classic example of computer processes (windows) battling over limited hardware resources (hardware color entries). So which windows
get which colors? The issues related to this dilemma are solved through
palettes, which are managed through the Palette Manager.
The Palette Manager is a layer of software that lies between applications and GDevice ColorTables. Its primary job is to resolve color
contention with a minimum of changes in the GDevice's ColorTable.
Palettes are constructed similarly to CTables, with the addition of
usage data for each color entry. Applications interact with the Palette
Manager simply by determining the desired colors for a window or
group of windows, creating an appropriate palette, and attaching it to
that window or windows. From that point on, the Window and Palette Managers take responsibility for all management of the GDevice's
color entries. The Palette Manager resolves contention for display
GDevice's ColorTable entries through a set of well-defined entry usage and color matching algorithms.
The Palette Manager's role in the arbitration of color requests and
resolution of color contention is like that of a librarian: Color entries
can be checked out, used as needed, and returned to the shelves for
other windows to use .

...,. Basic Palette Concepts
A palette's header are pmEntries, which simply indicate how many
color entries the palette contains, and pmDataFields, which are reserved for future use by system software. Some definitions of the Palette

182

ll> Chapter 4

Display Control and Offscreen Drawing

structure divide pmDataFields into pmWindow, pmPrivate, pmDevices,
and pmSeeds. In either case, those 12 bytes should be left alone.
The pminfo entries (the color specifications) differentiate a palette
from a ColorTable. Each pminfo entry describes not only the RGB color
but the closeness to which that color needs to be matched when the
palette is activated.
Windows and Color Requests

A palette is the means by which a window expresses the color that it
wishes to have available to draw its contents accurately. The Palette
Manager treats a palette as a list of color requests. Each window in the
system has an associated palette. If the application fails to assign one,
then the Palette Manager uses a default palette.
The requests presented by the frontmost window's palette of the
foreground application takes precedence over all other color requests.
· Every time a new window or application is brought to the front or
foreground, the Window Manager informs the Palette Manager. The
Palette Manager, in turn, determines whether a change in the GDevice's
ColorTable is necessary to fulfill the color request made by that
window's palette. The Palette Manager makes any necessary changes
in the appropriate GDevice's ColorTable to accommodate the window's
palette so that the window's contents appear to the user as the application intends.
Think of a palette as a list of requests; each entry in a palette is a
color that your window wants to be able to use. When a window's
palette is installed in the ColorTable, each entry in the palette will
occupy, or be accounted for by, an entry in the ColorTable within the
rules of that palette entry's usage attribute. See the "Entry usage" section
on the Palette Manager that follows for more details. When another
window's palette is installed in the ColorTable, if any entries were
changed to accommodate the new palette, then the Color Manager
assumes that entries that the window is using may have changed and
it tells the application so by giving your window an update event.
When, in response to the update event, you redraw the contents of
your window color, matching takes place with the current (changed)
ColorTable and new entries are used where appropriate.
Here's an example to illustrate what we mean by color environment
changes causing update events. Suppose an application has a window
which is drawn with a red background. The window's palette
contains an entry with values RGB = (65535, 0, 0) and before drawing
into the window the application calls RGBBackColor( &myRedBack-

.,.. The Palette Manager

183

ground) where myRedBackground.RGB = (65535, 0, 0). Let's say that
when the application's window came to the front (and its palette was
installed in the GDevice' s ColorTable), the background red color ended
up in the ColorTable at index 12. Suppose that the application is also
sharing the system with another application whose window has a
palette that installs a pastel pink in the ColorTable at index 125 and
the rest of the ColorTable is filled with shades of gray. When the
second application's window comes to the front, as it probably would
if it got clicked on by the user, its palette is installed in the GDevice's
ColorTable, which, because at least one entry was changed, causes the
application to receive an update event for its window. After the second application's palette was installed, the red background color was
replaced in the ColorTable by some shade of gray and at that instant
the background flashed from red to gray. The update event is the
application's opportunity to adjust to the changing color environment.
When the window's update routine tries to set its background color to
red, Color QuickDraw can't oblige; the red color is no longer in the
GDevice's ColorTable. So the Color Manager maps the request to the
pastel pink that it finds at index 125 and the window's update routine
drawing with a pink background. The justification, of course, is that
pink is a better substitute for red than just trusting to luck and using
whatever color replaced the color of choice.
The need for the Palette Manager grew out of the problems that
arise when more than one window with different color needs try to
display on the same indexed GDevice. The result is contention for the
GDevice's ColorTable, and the Palette Manager was created to arbitrate the conflicts. The Palette Manager is most interesting when
windows are being displayed on an indexed monitor so the discussion
that follows concentrates on indexed pixels being displayed on indexed GDevices. The use of direct pixels is mentioned here and there
to keep the rules and facts complete and accurate.
The Palette Manager is started up the first time that InitWindows()
is called after the Macintosh is turned on. It runs independently of
windows, which can come and go, and also independently of applications, which can start and quit while the Palette Manager remains
active. Contention for GDevice CLUT entries comes from windows in
different applications as well as from windows of the same application.
Entry Stealing
If the GDevice has enough unused color entries, or if the current entry
values meet the palette's requirements, then the Palette Manager
changes entries in the GDevice's ColorTable. When there are not

184

~

Chapter 4

Display Control and Offscreen Drawing

enough available unused entries, the Palette Manager changes entries
that belong to another window's palette. This process is known as
entry stealing.

\

Color Updates. A window whose palette has entries stolen is said to
experience a color environment change; if the window's palette was
set with a SetPalette() or NSetPalette() call whose "cUpdates" argument requested updates, then the Palette Manager will invalidate the
contents of that window. The ensuing update event is called a color
update. Color updates involve the redrawing of entire windows and
may happen to many windows simultaneously. The resultant flash
associated with numerous windows redrawing themselves can be
quite disconcerting. The frequency with which color updates occur is
determined by four factors:
• the number of different palettes across all applications;
• palette size, or the number of colors;
• palette "flexibility," implied by the palette entry usages; and
• the number of front window changes between windows of differing palettes.
It should be evident that the user has the most control over the color
environment. Running applications that demand large numbers of
displayable colors tends to increase color updates for all windows in
all applications. The applications that are the most "color-aggressive"
are games and other graphics-intensive programs, particularly paint
programs. Users who frequently run these kinds of applications in
addition to other applications will probably experience both eyestrain
and more than an average number of color updates.

Assignment of Color Updates. The Apple documentation implies
that the Palette Manager is making informed decisions about which
windows do and do not need color updates. But, in fact, any window
on a GDevice whose CLUT has been changed gets an update event.
Even windows with explicit palettes - windows that, by design,
don't care which color values are at which entries in the GDevice's
ColorTable - get notified of color environment changes. The other
unfortunate thing about color updates is that a color update cannot be
distinguished from a "normal" (window order change) update.

~

Important JIJ>

The Palette Manager

185

Tech Note #120, Building an Offscreen PixMap, suggests that color
updates can be recognized by keeping track of the GDevice
ColorTable's ctSeed value. Unfortunately, this is an unreliable indicator, as a number of other processes cause the seed value to
change without causing a "real" color update.
Palette Data Structure

Listing 4.4 shows the definition of the Palette data structure.
Listing 4.4. Palette data structure
typedef struct
{

RGBColor
short
short
short
long

ciRGB;
ciUsage ;
ciTolerance;
ciFlags ;
ciPrivate ;

Colorinfo ;
typedef struct
{

short
short
Colorinfo

prnEntries ;
prnDataFields [ 6] ;
prninfo [ 1] ;

Palette, *PalettePtr , **PaletteHandle;

This data structure is presented for informational purposes only. All
palette data access and modification should be performed using the
appropriate Palette Manager traps rather than accessing a palette
variable directly. The exception to this rule is that the pmEntries field
may be read in order to determine the number of color entries. The
other fields are used by the Palette Manager to maintain private status
information particular to each palette.
Entry Color

Recall the ColorTable structure from Chapter 3. It consists of a simple
header followed by an array of color definitions. A palette structure is

186

~

Chapter 4

Display Control and Offscreen Drawing

very similar to a ColorTable with the addition of fields in each color
specification to describe the intended usage of the entry and its associated color value. Each palette entry has an associated RGB value.
The Palette Manager considers white-and-black entries to be special,
provided they are the first and last palette entries, respectively. These
entries are fixed and cannot be stolen. The Palette Manager expects to
see those entry colors in their rightful places. A palette may have any
number of additional black and/ or white entries. ColorTables should
also be built according to this rule.
Entry Usage

Every palette entry has a usage value that defines the degree to which
that color request should be satisfied:
• Courteous - Courteous colors simply reserve a place in the palette
for a particular color. When drawing with courteous colors, the
best available color match is used, regardless of how close the
available color matches it.
• Explicit - An explicit usage directs the Palette Manager to provide the color currently available at that index, regardless of what
that color may be; the entry's color is ignored. Explicit colors are
as innocuous as courteous color in that neither usage will force
the Palette Manager to cause a color update.
• Tolerant - Tolerant colors are perhaps the most useful to the
most applications. When tolerant colors are added to the
ColorTable, the available entries are first checked to see if there is
a color already in the table that is a close enough match to the
requested color. The difference between two colors is defined as
the maximum of the three differences between the colors' respective components. The tolerance value specified in the palette
entry for a tolerant color tells the Palette Manager how close is
close enough for a match. A tolerance of zero means that the
entry's color must match exactly. Such entries may cause color
environment changes.
• Animated - An animating palette entry reserves an index in the
GDevice's ColorTable for exclusive use of all windows associated
with that palette. This allows applications to make frequent, rapid
color changes to the contents of their windows, without having to
redraw them. This technique is often referred to as color animation,
and is employed by a number of game applications and "lavalight" screen savers.

.,.. The Palette Manager

187

The animated entry usage is the most demanding of the color
environments; animated entries are reserved by that palette for as
long as it exists.
• Grayscale-inhibited and color-inhibited - The inhibited usage
allows selective control of which display types attempt color
request matching. A palette containing color entry values by definition cannot match exactly or even very closely on a grayscale
display. Such palettes are good candidates for inhibited entries.
Entry Tolerance

Every palette entry has an associated tolerance value. However, this
value is only pertinent to tolerant entries. It defines the allowable distance between an entry's color value and a prospective color value match.
~

Important Palette Manager Traps
The following traps make up the core of the Palette Manager application interface.
Creating and Disposing Palettes
PaletteHandle NewPalette(
nurnEntries,
short
srcColors,
CTabHandle
srcUsage,
short
srcTolerance );
short
PaletteHandle GetNewPalette(
short
paletteID ) ;

These two traps create palettes. NewPaletteO builds a palette from
the first "numEntries" entries of an existing ColorTable "srcColors,"
setting each entry's usage and tolerance value to "srcUsage" and
"srcTolerance," respectively.
GetNewPalette() creates a palette from a 'pltt' resource with an ID
"paletteID." Because palettes must be "registered" and initialized by
the Palette Manager, the application must load resource-based palettes
using this trap rather than GetResource(). Palettes are automatically
created and assigned to windows created by GetNewCWindow() if
both a 'pltt' and 'WIND' resource exist with the specified resource IDs.

188

IJJ>

Chapter 4

Display Control and Offscreen Drawing

void DisposePalette(
PaletteHandle thePalette );

This trap disposes of all memory associated with a palette and all
references to it, regardless of which palette trap it was originally
created with. Disposing of a palette must be performed by this trap
rather than DisposHandle(), otherwise the Palette Manager gets confused when activating the window that it used to belong to.
Palette Assignment
void SetPalette(
WindowPtr
PaletteHandle
Boolean

destWindow,
srcPalette,
cUpdates );

void NSetPalette(
WindowPtr
destWindow,
PaletteHandle
srcPalette,
short
pmUpdateFlags );

These traps associate "srcPalette" with "destWindow." Actually, these
two traps are the same traps with an enhanced meaning for the last argument, which indicates under what circumstances "destWindow" will
receive color updates. NSetPalette() is a slightly more recent version
of SetPalette(); its "pmUpdates" argument takes one of the following
constant values: "front window only," "background window only,"
"always," or "never." SetPalette()'s "cUpdate" argument allows only
for always (TRUE) or never (FALSE). A "destWindow" value of -1
directs the Palette Manager to make "srcPalette" the default palette.
Pen Color Assignment
void PmForeColor(
palindex ) ;
short
void PmBackColor(
palindex ) ;
short

These traps operate similarly to the their absolute color counterparts
RGBForeColor() and RGBBackColor(), except that they take palette
indexes rather than RGB values as arguments. The index values are
forced within the range of actual palette entries via modulo math:
index = index modulo pmEntries

.,.. The Palette Manager

189

Palette Activation
void ActivatePalette(
PaletteHandle
thePalette ) ;

This trap instructs the Palette Manager to re-register "thePalette." This
trap is called by the Window Manager whenever a new window is
made frontmost so that applications won't have to call ActivatePalette()
in response to activate events. This trap should be called after changes
to one or more of a palette's entries (color or usage) are performed.
Palette and CTable Conversions
void CTab2Palette(
CTabHandle
srcCTab,
PaletteHandle
destPalette,
short
usage,
short
tolerance);
void Palette2CTab(
PaletteHandle
srcPalette,
CTabHandle
destCTab );

These traps allow simple conversion between palettes and
ColorTables. Each Handle-based argument must be a vali~ Handle.
Palette Entry Control
void GetEntryColor(
PaletteHandle
thePalette,
short
destEntry,
RGBColor
*srcRGB );
void SetEntryColor(
PaletteHandle
thePalette,
short
destEntry,
RGBColor
*srcRGB );

These traps allow read/write access to palette entry RGB color
values and should be used in lieu of direct references to palette data.
If the entry is out of range, then no action is taken and/ or no arguments are modified.
void GetEntryUsage(
PaletteHandle
thePalette,

190

..,.. Chapter 4

Display Control and Offscreen Drawing

short
short

destEntry,
*srcusage ) ;

void SetEntryUsage(
PaletteHandle
thePalette,
short
destEntry,
short
srcUsage );
void GetEntryTolerance(
PaletteHandle
thePalette,
destEntry,
short
*srcusage ) ;
short
void SetEntryTolerance(
PaletteHandle
thePalette,
destEntry,
short
srcUsage ) ;
short

These traps allow read/write access to palette entry usage and
tolerance values and should be used in lieu of direct references to
Palette data. If the entry is out of range, then no action is taken and no
arguments are modified.
IJll..

The Dark Past of the Palette Manager
The Palette Manager has been with Macintosh since the introduction
of Color QuickDraw; however, earlier versions had a number of critical limitations:
• Palettes couldn't assign a color to a specific entry, making it
difficult to display and manipulate pixel data whose relative
values were significant, such as false color images.
• Color animation was limited. It wasn't possible to animate the
contents of more than one window at a time, making it difficult to
perform operations such as contrast adjustment.
• It was unable to define default palettes.
• It couldn't share palettes - one palette per window, one window
per palette.
• It couldn't use CopyBits() to transfer animating pixel values.
These limitations induced many applications to program around the
Palette Manager by calling the Color Manager to change display

.,.. The Palette Manager

191

GDevice ColorTables directly. The Palette Manager has been enhanced
considerably since its inception; all the limitations listed here have
been substantially addressed.
Important..,.

If you're developing an application that requires unblemished pal-

ette functionality, then it will require version 1.2 of Color QuickDraw, which contains the earliest version of the Palette Manager
with the enhancements mentioned here.
_IL

The Palette Manager provides an application with enough color
environment control, but it doesn't burden the application with the
task of maintaining the color states of windows in other applications
over multiple public GDevices. The Palette Manager sits above the
Color Manager and the Graphic Devices Manager, making calls to
each to manage palettes across multiple GDevices .

.,.. Using Palettes
Palettes are extremely crucial to effective indexed color environment
management. The basic palette techniques are quite simple: An application can be ecologically courteous and still appear in its requested
colors, provided that all executing applications follow Apple's palette
guidelines. With a bit of care, applications can exercise a high degree
of sophisticated color display control without causing frequent color
updates for other applications.
Associating Palettes with Windows

To associate a palette with a window, simply call NSetPalette() with
the window, the palette, and the constant indicating which type of
color updates the window should receive. Most applications will call
for the value "pmAllUpdates" for the last argument.
If a window is created via GetNewCWindow() and there is an
available, corresponding 'pltt' resource with the same ID as the window, then that palette will be allocated and assigned to that window
automatically.
There is also a default palette, which is used for all color windows
that don't have a palette. This palette is the system palette on application
startup, but it can be changed by calling SetPalette() or NSetPalette()
and passing -1 for the WindowPtr argument. Ironically, the default

192

..,. Chapter 4

Display Control and Offscreen Drawing

palette cannot be obtained with GetPalette(); calling this trap with a
WindowPtr argument that references a window that has no palette
simply returns NULL.
Associating Palettes with CGrafPorts

Earlier in the chapter we stated that palettes were only associated
with windows. In reality, palettes can be associated with any CGrafPort.
Associating a palette with an offscreen CGrafPort has no effect on its
appearance because it is offscreen. However, it does allow pen color
assignments via the PmForeColorO and PmBackColorO traps. Additionally, setting the second-highest bit of the ctFlags field of a
CGrafPort's ColorTable directs QuickDraw to treat indexed pixel values as palette indexes rather than as ColorTable indexes. This allows
animating pixel values to be transferred via CopyBits() unchanged, an
otherwise impossible task due to the fact ~hat animating entries are
reserved and otherwise not matchable by CopyBits().
Choosing Usages and Tolerances

Generally speaking, it's best to keep palettes as flexible as possible.
Use high-tolerance values for tolerant entries whenever possible. Minimize the number of animated and low-tolerance entries. Use courteous entries whenever possible. Palettes structured around these
guidelines allow the Palette Manager to effectively distribute and
share requested colors to the maximum number of applications with a
minimum of entry stealing and color updates.
Compound Usages. Under Color QuickDraw, (versions 1.0 and later)
the Palette Manager supports certain combinations of usage values.
These combinations allow the exact specification of which color gets
assigned to which entry, an important feature necessary for the accurate display of scans and other false-color images. Additionally, the
inhibitory usages may be added to any usage value in order to prevent color requests from being generated on indexed GDevices of
specific pixel depths and color capabilities.
Tolerant/ explicit usage values direct the Palette Manager to install
the requested color at the requested entry. This is particularly useful
for displaying false-color images. The recipe for displaying false-color
images while avoiding undesired color matching is as follows:
1. Construct a palette to match the image's desired colors and install
it into the destinati<?n window using NSetPalette().

~

The Palette Manager

193

2. Set bit 14 ($4000 hexadecimal) in the ctFlags field of the image's
offscreen PixMap's ColorTable. (See the "Associating Palettes with
GrafPorts" section.)
3. Call CopyBits() to update the window as needed.
Setting the ctFlags bit directs CopyBits() to skip the color matching
step that it would otherwise perform. The rates achievable by this
method allow for series of images to be displayed close enough to the
30 images per second video rate, depending on the width and height
of the displayed images.
Explicit/ animated usage values are the most inflexible and demanding of all usage combinations, translating into color requests at specific entries that cannot be matched by any other palette. This usage
can be very useful when a large number of related pixel values are to
be animated all at once. However, it's best to limit this usage for only
as long as it's absolutely needed because it shuts out all other applications from using those affected entries and related indexed pixel
values.
As shown in Table 4-1, the request inhibitors are useful for suppressing
color requests that are inappropriate for particular GDevice settings.
Table 4-1. Palette entry inhibitory constants

Usage flag

Inhibit requests on GDevices

pmlnhibitG2
pmlnhibitC2
pmlnhibitG4
pmlnhibitC4
pmlnhibitG8
pmlnhibitC8

2-bit grayscale
2-bit color
4-bit grayscale
4-bit color
8-bit grayscale
8-bit color

Palettes and Direct GDevices
As established in the previous chapter, color arbitration is non-existent
on direct GDevices. In general terms this implies a relaxation of rules
and restrictions on palettes. The effect on palette entry usages and
tolerances is as follows:
• Courteous, tolerant - Equivalent to intolerant (zero tolerance
value) entries. An entry's color request is always fulfilled.

194

..,. Chapter 4

Display Control and Offscreen Drawing

• Explicit, animated, inhibited - Has no meaning, since direct
GDevices don't have entries. GDevice entries and color values
cannot be reserved by applications.

The PmForeColor() and PmBackColorO traps become functionally
equivalent to RGBForeColor() and RGBBackColor() calls, using the
palette entry's color value, as shown in the following example:
PmForeColor( 4 ) ; ==> RGBForeColor( &((**pltt) .pminfo[4] .rgb) );

Creating and Using 'pltt' Resources

Like all other user interface objects, palettes can be resource-based.
Like windows and dialogs, palette resources are template-based: Multiple
copies of a palette can be generated from a single palette resource.
Palettes may be saved as resources simply by writing the contents of a
PaletteHandle to a resource file as a resource of type 'pltt'.
Using 'pltt' resources has some interesting implications, particularly
regarding entry usage and tolerance. Generally speaking, an application decides on entry tolerance and usage values based on the state of
the application's windows and the hardware limitations of the available display GDevices. This being the case, the usage and tolerance
values found in the resource are best ignored, except when the application can be sure of the resource's origin, for example, when it
created the palette. A palette stripped of usage and tolerance is a
ColorTable, plain and simple. An application can easily load a
ColorTable from a 'clut' resource, convert it into a palette, and assign
new tolerance and usage values, as shown in Listing 4-5.
Listing 4-5. Building a palette from a CTabHandle
PaletteHandle BuildClutPalette(
short clutResindex )
PaletteHandle
CTabHandle

curPalette;
curClut;

/* load a 'clut' resource and copy its data into a */
/* newly allocated CTabHandle */
curClut = GetCTable( clutResindex ) ;
if (curClut == NULL)
return NULL;

lill>

The Palette Manager

195

!* build a new palette, assigning usage and tolerance */

/* values for all entries */
curPalette =
NewPalette( curClut,
(**curClut) .ctSize + 1,
pmTolerant, Ox2000 );
/* don't need this anymore */
DisposCTable( curClut ) ;
return curPalette;

Palette Animation Example
Palette animation is a wonderful way to generate dynamic, kinetic
graphic effects with a minimum of programming fuss while incurring
the execution workload of "real" drawn animation.
The main issues to consider when animating a palette are as follows:
• Which entries should you animate? - The most effective palette
animation techniques involve reserving a small numl;>er of contiguous entries at one end or the other of the GDevice' s ColorTable.
The number of entries required is equal to the number of different
colors for each animated graphic times the number of animation
phases to cycle through. Figure 4-6 shows a possible animation
sequence.
The animated graphic has five colors and cycles through four
phases, one for each drawing; it therefore would require 20 animating entries.
• How should the animating colors be maintained? - The
AnimateEntry() trap takes a single RGB color. For animating
subranges of entries, the AnimatePalette() trap is more appropriate: It takes a ColorTable and a number of offset value arguments,
allowing a whole range of palette entries to be animated at once.
This readily facilitates color cycling, the process of rotating through
a small fixed set of RGBColor values.
• How often should animating take place? - That depends. The
cycle time is usually regulated by using the TickCount() trap to
divide animation intervals into %0 of a second chunks. A palette
animation cycle can shift a small number of entries frequently to
effect smooth color transitions, or it can shift a large number of
entries less often to produce dramatic changes. In Figure 4-6, the

196

..,. Chapter 4

Display Control and Offscreen Drawing

drawing could be made to move by cycling through a ColorTable
that contained five unique colors in adjacent entries, with the remaining entry colors matching the background. If the palette was
animated by cycling it in increments of five entries, then the
drawing would move left to right on each animation phase.
Pixel Index

2

3

4

5

2 3

4

5

2

5

2

3

4

5

Pixel Index

2

3

4

5

2

3

4

5

2 3 4 5

2

3

4

5

Pixel Index

2

3

4

5

2

3

4

5

2

2

3

4

5

3

3

4

4

5

Motion is achieved by animating five consecutive entries.

Figure 4-6. Drawing with animated entries

• When is animation permissible? - The only windows that can
animate their palette are those that share their palette with the
frontmost window in the current foreground application. All other
window animation requests will be ignored. However, the available entries requested will be reserved by that window and palette and will become unavailable to other windows. A courteous
animating window will give up some of its entries, especially if it
reserves a large number of entries, say, more than 64.

In Listing 4-6, the CColorCycler class is presented. It attempts to
address the concerns just described as simply as possible.
Listing 4-6. CColorCycler class
t ypedef enurn
{

COLORANIMOPT_ non e
COLORANI MOPT_some

0,
1

ColorAnimation_ OptF l ags ;

c l ass Col orCycler : i n direct
{

Pt r
lon g

nextObj ect ;
object ID ;

~

WindowPtr
CTabHandle
Point
short
short
short
unsigned long
unsigned long

The Palette Manager

197

plttWindow;
animCTabHdl;
/* colors used in animation */
cycleRange;
/* index range for animation */
cycleincrement; /* # of indexes to skip each */
/* time */
animationMode;
/* special animation tricks */
/* enabled? */
curPlttEntry;
/* palette entry being */
/* animated */
lastAnimTicks;
/* time of last palette */
!* shift */
animTickDelay;
/* # of ticks to wait */
/* between shifts */

void Init( void};
void Dispose( void } ;
void SetWindow(
/* associate window with object */
WindowPtr
thePlttWindow ) ;
OSErr PaletteChanged( void ) ; /*update the internal ColorTable */
Boolean IsActive( void } ;

/* check if cycling */

void SetCycling(
Boolean makeActive );

/* turn cycling on or off */

void Advance( void ) ;

/* advance one cycle */

};

void ColorCycler: :Init( void
{

this->nextObject = NULL;
this->objectID = OL;
this->plttWindow = NULL;
this->animCTabHdl = NULL;
SetPt( &(this->cycleRange), l, 254 } ;
this->cycleincrement = 1;
this->animationMode = COLORANIMOPT_none;
this->curPlttEntry = l;

198

.,. Chapter 4 Display Control and Offscreen Drawing

this->lastAnimTicks
this->animTickDelay

OL;
lL;

void ColorCycler::Dispose( void)
{

if (this->animCTabHdl != NULL)
DisposCTable( this->animCTabHdl );

void ColorCycler::SetWindow(
WindowPtr thePlttWindow )
this->plttWindow = thePlttWindow;
(void)this->PaletteChanged();

OSErr ColorCycler::PaletteChanged( void)
{

PaletteHandle
CTabHandle
Size
OS Err

curPlttHdl;
newCTabH;
newCTSize;
errStat;

if (this->plttWindow == NULL)
return (OSErr) (-1);
curPlttHdl = GetPalette( this->plttWindow );
if (curPlttHdl == NULL)
return (OSErr) (-1);
newCTabH = this->animCTabHdl;
if (newCTabH == NULL)
{

/* allocate a new empty ColorTable */
newCTSize = sizeof(ColorTable) - sizeof(CSpecArray);
newCTabH = (CTabHandle)NewHandleClear( newCTSize );
errStat = MemError();
if (errStat != noErr)
return errStat;

Palette2CTab( curPlttHdl, newCTabH );
this->animCTabHdl = newCTabH;

~

The Palette Manager

199

return errStat;

Boolean ColorCycler: :IsActive( void )
{

return (this->animationMode != COLORANIMOPT_none);

/*

** "unrotate" the palette and reset cycling variables
*/

void ColorCycler::SetCycling(
Boolean makeActive )
if (makeActive == this->IsActive())
RETURN;
this->curPlttEntry = this->cycleRange.h;
i f (makeActive)

this->animationMode = COLORANIMOPT_some;
else
this->animationMode = COLORANIMOPT_none;
AnimatePalette(
this->plttWindow, this->animCTabHdl, l, l,
(**(this->animCTabHdl)) .ctSize - 1 ) ;

void ColorCycler::Advance( void)
{

PaletteHandle thePlttHdl;
newRGBvalue;
RGBColor
thePaletteWindow;
WindowPtr
ctEntries, firstEntry, lastEntry, animatingEntries;
short
if ( (this->animationMode <= COLORANIMOPT_none)
(this->animCTabHdl ==NULL))
RETURN;

II

if (this->animTickDelay > 0)
if (this->lastAnimTicks + this->animTickDelay > TickCount ())
RETURN;

200

..,,. Chapter 4

Display Control and Offscreen Drawing

if (CheckKeyDown( KEYBIT_caps_lock ) )
RETURN;
if (this->plttWindow
RETURN;

NULL)

thePlttHdl = GetPalette( this->plttWindow ) ;
if (thePlttHdl == NULL)
RETURN;
/* calculate the appropriate maximum palette animation range */
ctEntries = (**(this->animCTabHdl)) .ctSize + l;
#ifdef _PALETTE_BW_PROTECT_
firstEntry = l;
lastEntry = ctEntries - l;
#else
first Entry = O;
lastEntry = ctEntries;
#endif _PALETTE_BW_PROTECT_
/* restrict it further by the user's ramp range preferences */
if ((firstEntry < this->cycleRange.h) &&
(this->cycleRange.h <= lastEntry))
firstEntry = this->cycleRange.h;
if ((lastEntry > this->cycleRange.v) &&
(this->cycleRange.v >= firstEntry))
lastEntry = this->cycleRange.v;
animatingEntries = lastEntry - firstEntry;
if (animatingEntries <= 0)
RETURN;
if (this->curPlttEntry < this->cycleRange.h)
this->curPlttEntry = this->cycleRange.h;
else if (this->curPlttEntry > this->cycleRange.v)
this->curPlttEntry = this->cycleRange.v;
/* perform palette animation, in two pieces */
AnimatePalette(
this->plttWindow, this->animCTabHdl,
this->curPlttEntry, firstEntry,
(lastEntry + 1) - this->curPlttEntry ) ;
AnimatePalette(
this->plttWindow, this->animCTabHdl, firstEntry,
firstEntry + (lastEntry + 1 - this->curPlttEntry),
this->curPlttEntry - f irstEntry ) ;

~

The Palette Manager

201

/* advance the point of rotation */
this->curPlttEntry += this->cycleincrement;
while (this->curPlttEntry < firstEntry)
thiS->CUrPlttEntry =
lastEntry - ((firstEntry - this->curPlttEntry) %
animatingEntries);
if (this->curPlttEntry > lastEntry)
this->curPlttEntry =
((this->curPlttEntry - lastEntry) % animatingEntries) +
firstEntry;
/* update the animation counter */
this->lastAnimTicks = TickCount();

~

Palette Review
Palettes are an extremely clever and useful addition to the graphics
programmer's tool kit. They provide a simple and reliable way for
windows across all "courteous" applications to painlessly share
GDevice color entries with minimal disruption to the display and
execution processes of other windows and applications. Palettes can
be harnessed for precise control of image display characteristics and
"sprite" animation graphics at the expense of other applications that
get their entries stolen when these operations are invoked in the
frontmost window.

...,_ Specialized ColorTables
As noted in Chapter 3, every ColorTable has an ID number that is
stored in its ctSeed field. The significance of this value depends on the
range of numbers that it falls within:
• 0 to 127 - These values are reserved by the Graphics Toolbox for
ColorTables that describe standard ColorTables.
• 1 to 24 - These IDs are reserved for ColorTables for the default
color monitor display at that pixel depth. For example, the default
ColorTable ID for an 8-bit color display is 8.
• 33 to 63 - These IDs are reserved for ColorTables for the default
grayscale monitor display at that pixel depth, plus 32. For ex-

202

.,.. Chapter 4

Display Control and Offscreen Drawing

ample, the default ColorTable for an 8-bit grayscale display is 8 +
32 = 40.
• 64 to 88 - These IDs are reserved for ColorTables for the default
color monitor display, including the current highlight color, at
that pixel depth, plus 64. For example, the default ColorTable for
a 4-bit color display, including highlight color, is 4 + 64 = 68. The
highlight color is discussed later in this chapter.
• 127 - This is the ID of the Finder's Classic ColorTable, which is
visible as items in its Colors menu.
• 128 to 1023 - These IDs are reserved for application ColorTables.
• 1023 and greater - These IDs are reserved by the Color Manager.
The trap GetCTSeed() returns a unique value in this range. In order
to guarantee the uniqueness of seed values, applications should
refrain from using these values for their own ColorTable IDs.
ColorTables can be created by calling the Color Manager's GetCTable() trap with an integer value designating a valid ColorTable. If
the ID indicates a valid default ColorTable, then the ColorTable is
allocated and the appropriate values are generated by the Color Manager. If the ID is in the application ID range, then the trap looks for a
'clut' resource with that ID. If it finds one, then it fills the entry values
from the resource. If the ID doesn't indicate a valid ColorTable, or
there isn't enough free heap space to create one, NULL is returned.
To create a CTable from scratch, the following steps should be taken:
1. Call NewHandle() to allocate enough memory to hold the ColorTable and all entry data.
size (colortable)

= size(ctSeed + ctSize + ctFlags) +#entries x size(ColorSpec)

= 8 + (# of entries x 8) bytes

2. Assign values for the ctFlags, ctSeed, and ctSize.
ctFlags =
$0000 for CTables in PixMaps
$4000 for CTables in CGrafPort PixMaps with a palette
$8000 for CTables in GDevices
ctSeed =
value from GetCTSeed()

.,.. Specialized Color Tables

203

ctSize =
number of entries minus one
3. Assign color values to ColorTable entries.
There are routines to perform simple ColorTable creation and entry
assignment in CTabUtils, which can be found in the Source Code
Appendix.
~

GDevice ColorTables
We are already familiar with this ColorTable, and with the fact that it's
managed by Color Manager traps rather than direct modification. An
indexed GDevice ColorTable requires as many entries as there are
possible color values; more entries are insignificant, fewer entries
cause the color value of higher pixel index values to be calculated as a
weighted average of the foreground and background pen colors. Each
entry contains the RGB color value to display for the corresponding
pixel index value. The entry's index value is inferred by its position in
the ColorTable rather than the value field's value! The entry's value
field is used by the Color Manager to hold color matching information.

~

User Interface ColorTables
In a Color QuickDraw machine, all of the familiar user interface objects
may have associated ColorTables - menus, controls, dialogs, and
windows. These ColorTables are used to hold color values for parts of
the particular object, each entry position being associated with a
specific part. For example, a control's ColorTable is defined as follows:
Entry 0:
Entry 1:
Entry 2:

text color
frame color
background fill color

Each object's ColorTable has a unique index format, still each is a
ColorTable with the same format as a PixMap's ColorTable.
As with palettes and windows, there are ColorTable resource types
that correspond to the various user interface resource types. For example, the 'cctb' type is a control ColorTable, and a 'cctb' of ID 55
would be associated with a 'CNTL' resource of ID 55. Calling GetNewControl( 55, someWindow ) would create a control from the 'CNTL'
resource #55 and then attach a ColorTable created from the 'cctb' resource

204

~

Chapter 4 Display Control and Offscreen Drawing

#55. Certain user interface ColorTables have one or two traps that are
used to assign entry color values and associate ColorTables with
interface objects, in very much the same fashion as palettes are bound
to windows.
Additionally, some of these user interface objects allow for a default
ColorTable; usually this is the one with a resource ID of zero.
Important~

An annoying quirk involving dialogs and palettes demands a
mention here: If a dialog created via GetNewDialog() uses a pal-

ette, then that dialog also requires a corresponding 'dctb' (dialog
ColorTable) resource of the same resource ID as the dialog itself,
or the dialog will be created with a standard GrafPort and the
palette and all related operations will have no effect. This resource may have zero or more entries.

Summary
This chapter presented two display control paradigms: offscreen drawing and palette-based display control. The chapter presented a brief
discussion of video hardware characteristics, along with the concept
of flicker and some of its causes. The chapter introduced GWorld as
the preferred vehicle of offscreen drawing, providing comprehensive
functionality with reduced complexity over the methods introduced
in Chapter 3. The chapter also covered palettes and their component
concepts, along with some examples and strategies for their effective
employment in applications. Augmenting the discussion in Chapter 3,
this chapter discussed the use of special-purpose ColorTables.

5

Applied Graphics
Techniques

Up to this point, we've presented the Macintosh Graphics Toolbox as
merely a large collection of features and functionality. You have learned
of many of the tools that QuickDraw provides; this chapter focuses on
the application of the tools presented in the previous chapters. The
chapter begins by discussing the foundations and implementation of
an example "paintbox" application, ArtToy. The discussion moves into
windows and the constraints they impose on graphics presentation,
along with guidelines and techniques for using specific Window Manager and QuickDraw traps to effectively manage windows and their
contents within the desktop environment.
The chapter concludes with the development and discussion of two
groups of window support source code, the first a generalized window class, the other a GWorld-buffered window class, ideal for a
raster-oriented paint application. These classes are the heart of ArtToy's
window and paint document support code .

..,. Building a Paint Application - ArtToy
Many programmers regard access to concise and pertinent source
code examples as invaluable to the development of their own software
development efforts. In this chapter and the next, we present ArtToy,
an application that provides both reusable source code and clear
methods for organizing software components. The most illustrative
pieces of code are included in these chapters; the complete ArtToy
source code is on the disk only.
205

206

..,. Chapter 5

Applied Graphics Techniques

..,. Objectives and Goals
In the process of building a paint application, we hope that a large
number of software architecture issues can be both illuminated and
resolved. Most of these issues involve a choice between two or more
legitimate solutions, each of which is appropriate under a particular set
of circumstances. The cliche "There's more than one way to skin a cat"
holds true for Macintosh graphics programming, since a number of
seemingly similar tools are available for a specific purpose. For example,
there are three different Toolbox traps that can be used to set the
foreground pen color. Which one is right? It depends on the situation.
A number of Macintosh applications exist that have presented and
defined certain features so successfully that they have become a requirement for all applications of that type. The paint bucket and the
spray can are two examples of tools required for commercially viable
paint applications. Many popular features are task specific; a few are
truly general purpose. A magnifying glass could probably be useful in
any graphics application. The ability to sketch an area of interest is
equally important. ArtToy contains implementations of many popular
paint tools, along with sketching routines that can be reused outside
of the paihting environment.
Another important aspect of successful applications development is
modularity. ArtToy contains a number of "elemental" utility routines
that not only augment the final application's reliability but also support the ongoing development of any complex application. We understand that you may not be particularly interested in writing a paint
application, but it's both useful and important to understand Macintosh graphics within some sort of source code framework. We chose a
paint application primarily because the implementation covers a large
portion of Macintosh Graphics Toolbox functionality and technique .

..,. Software Tools Needed
The finished ArtToy application contains these functional components:
• document windows
• tool selection via tool windows
• sketch tool mouse tracking and document modification
• animated selection tools (lasso and marquee)
• Cut-Copy-Paste support
• printing support

~

Window Fundamentals

207

• PICT file reading and writing routines
• menus and associated command handlers
We will develop ArtToy from the bottom up in terms of functionality.
The following features will be elaborated on in this chapter:
• Basic window handling - Support for handling window creation and disposal, along with standard update and activate event
handling.
• Document window handling - The combination of a window
with a GWorld to present a pixel image. The GWorld shall be
readily accessible to other functional software components, particularly image modification tools and file 1/0 operations.
Chapter 6 presents the development of these tool features:
• Sketch tools - A sketch tool consists of three main components:
an interface selector, such as a tool palette window or menu
option; the effect itself, involving a transformation of the data
structures that make up the pixel image; and an interactive sketching procedure, which provides the user dynamic visual feedback
in response to mouse actions within a document window.
• Selection tools - A selection tool has the same three components
as a sketch tool, but is used to merely select an area within a
document window, rather than to actually change the content of
the document.
The other application components are outside of this book's scope,
but can be found on the Source Code disk.
~

Window Fundamentals
Windows are the foundation on which most, if not all, graphic user
interfaces are built. It's assumed that you understand the basics of
supporting windows within a Macintosh application, so there's no need
to review those techniques. However, the Toolbox's window support
strongly affects the visual display of graphics and the handling of user
input. The management of window-based color requests was covered
in the previous chapter; we continue to delve into other graphics
display techniques, particularly those involving clipped graphics operations, coordinate systems conversions, and update event handling, as
well as clipboard (cut-copy-paste) and printing techniques.

208

..,. Chapter 5

Applied Graphics Techniques

Windows are the primary vehicle for data display (output) and userapplication interactions (input). Regarding the display aspects, a window is the point at which an application's graphics capabilities meet
the display hardware and the constraints imposed by the limitations
of the hardware's capabilities. For example, an application may be
able to maintain a data model of a simple three-dimensional object
such as a sphere, but in order to display it on a screen, the application
must somehow "flatten" the sphere into a 2-D representation, hopefully, one that maintains some appearance of depth, either by clever
shading or animation effects.
As discussed earlier, these constraints are imposed and regulated by
the Color, Palette, Graphics Device, and Window Managers. A
window's input aspects are regulated by the Event and Process Managers, which route keyboard and mouse input to applications and
their windows via events.
The burden placed upon the application by the importance of windows should not be taken lightly. Developers who account for the
dual input/ output nature of windows early in the development cycle
are usually rewarded with applications that are both maintainable and
extensible; the failure to develop a solid foundation for handling the
display- and event-processing issues generally leads to undesirable
software complexity and the proliferation of special-case handling.
Many development systems and software libraries exist that are
intended to organize and simplify this substantial task. We will attempt to derive the more important concepts and methods put forth
by these packages .

.,... Graphic Foundations of Windows
A window is basically an on-screen GrafPort. The WindowRecord and
CWindowRecord are the underlying data structures used for all windows, dialogs, and alerts, as shown in Listing 5-1.
Listing 5- 1. CWindowRecord data structure
typedef struct
{

CGrafPort
short
char
char
char
char

port;
/* for WindowRecords: type GrafPort */
windowKind;
visible;
hilited;
goAwayFlag;
spareFlag;

~

RgnHandle
RgnHandle
RgnHandle
Handle
Handle
StringHandle
short
ControlHandle
WindowRecord
PicHandle
long

Window Fundamentals

209

strucRgn;
contRgn;
updateRgn;
windowDefProc;
dataHandle;
titleHandle;
titleWidth;
controlList;
*nextWindow;
windowPic;
refCon;

CWindowRecord, *CWindowPeek;
typedef

CGrafPtr CWindowPtr;

The functional features associated with a window are spatially organized, and described by a handful of regions contained within the
WindowRecord and its GrafPort.
~

Window Regions
The regions used to describe and maintain a window's appearance
and functionality are described in the following sections.
Structure Region

The structure region (strucRgn) is the area of the window that "belongs" to the window. More often than not, windows are adorned
with small controls placed along the window's perimeter within the
strucRgn. Some of the more familiar controls are
• Go away box - For closing the window
• Drag region - For moving the window to another screen location
• Grow icon - For "fine-tuned" resizing
• Zoom I unzoom box - For "coarse" resizing
• Title - For identifying windows to the user (located inside the
drag region)
This region is maintained jointly by the Window Manager and the
WDEF (window definition proc) routine that renders the window, and
should never be directly altered by an application. In actuality, the
grow box resides within the content region.

21 O

..,. Chapter 5

Applied Graphics Techniques

Content Region
The content region is the maximum area of the window available for
application's graphic presentation. This region should never be directly
altered by an application. However, the content region may be altered
by the Window Manager when applications call the following traps:
• ShowWindowO
• HideWindowO
• ShowHide()
• SizeWindow()
• ZoomWindow()

Visible Region
The visible region describes the area within the GrafPort available for
drawing. All displayable graphic operations occur within the intersection
of the current GrafPort's visRgn and clipRgn. An offscreen GrafPort's
visRgn is typically assigned shortly after creating the port itself, and is
used to describe the maximum drawing limits within that port. It may
strike you as rather odd that an offscreen port would have any visRgn
at all, given that it is offscreen. In contrast to offscreen ports, a visible
window's visRgn is changed by the Window Manager in order to accurately describe a window's visible area. In the majority of circumstances,
these changes are either the result of resizing the window (via grow or
zoom actions), or changing the window ordering and covering or exposing all or part of a given window. This region should never be directly
altered by an application. However, the visible region may be altered
by the Window Manager when applications call the following traps:
• ShowWindow()
• HideWindowO
• ShowHide()
• SizeWindow()
• ZoomWindow()
• Move Window()
• SelectWindow()
A window's "visRgn" serves an additional purpose to the one belonging to an offscreen GrafPort. It defines the current visible limits,
rather than simply the drawing limit, which will change if the user
clicks in the window's grow or zoom controls.

..,. Window Fundamentals

211

Clipping Region
As discussed in Chapter 2, the clipping region describes the area that the
application has deemed fit to draw within. This works in the same way
as masking tape allows house painters to mask off, or protect, specific
areas from being painted over when covering large areas with paint.
Update Region
The update region describes the area that has been determined to be
invalid and that requires redrawing by the application. Invalidating a
window's contents is usually the result of changing the window order
or uncovering some or all of an obscured window. It may also be the
result of an explicit call to the InvalRect() or InvalRgnO traps by application code, or a change in displayable color availability (as discussed in
Chapter 4) .
The relationship of these regions to a window is shown in Figures 5-1
and 5-2.

(**portPi~~rap).bounds / / / / /
portB1ts.bounds

/ / / / /

Figure 5-1 . Window rectangles

212

..,. Chapter 5 Applied Graphics Techniques

2 non-overlapping windows
A Window

"A Window" moves on top of "Behinder"
(limiting visRgn)
Wind o w

"A Window" moves off "Behinder"
causing updateRgn
R Windo w

Figure 5-2. Window and GrafPort regions

.... Window Fundamentals

Important.,..

~

213

All displayable graphic operations occur within the intersection
of the clipping, content, and visible regions. The content region is
the maximum area o.f the window available for an application's
graphic presentation.

Window Types and Presentation Considerations
The architecture of the software that supports window-based graphics
display is largely determined by the purpose of the graphic. In particular, does the graphic reflect some important aspect of the user's
data, or is the graphic being used to implement a user interface
control or define the effects of a data editing "tool"?
• Document windows - The primary object of computation: the
user's data set. The term "document" is often used to describe
this data set, which is often loaded from or saved to disk. Within
most useful or interesting applications, the largest portion of
programming effort is made on behalf of supporting document
windows.
• Tool palettes - Tool palette windows are often used to define the
mouse's "operational mode." The functionality of tool palettes is
quite similar to a set of menu options or a group of radio buttons;
however, the graphical nature of a tool palette can convey to
graphically inclined users more meaning and purpose regarding
available functionality than text in menu items or radio buttons.
• Simple dialogs - Dialogs are frequently used to manipulate one
feature or a few related features of document presentation. Because these dialogs are usually modal, the rendering and mousetracking tasks can be handled through one or two dedicated
routines, without having to account for update-oriented rendering (discussed later in this chapter.) Alerts rarely if ever have
significant graphics associated with their display, and as such
don't require any special graphics support.
Are there any other distinct ways to utilize windows? It certainly
depends on your own judgment, and this classification scheme may
not accommodate your development strategies adequately. In any
case, we can use this scheme to assess the general implementation
requirements for the graphics programming effort required of particular application features.

214

IJl>

Chapter 5 Applied Graphics Techniques

..,. Views
The applications developed for the early Macintosh models tended to
use windows simply. Windows often contained no more than a couple
of application-specific data types and a slightly greater number of
different interface object types: only one or two. This organizational
discipline accounted for the following functional window types:
• simple documents
• user alerts
• modeless control panels and tool palettes
• modal control panels
For the first few years of Macintosh computing, the majority of
windows implemented for applications fit somewhere in this classification scheme. Figure 5-3 shows a number of familiar window examples, grouped by functional type.
Rattoflnsertion

PointB1inlcfn9
Desktop Pattern

~

Fast

Slow

-~----l i

I-Tim_•

1=

4-

1---=---l 3 -

2-

~

~

:I 1111
+ PD
,_,

flli!I

f1J"'- Olili)

!!J"l~ OE!!)

Li! RI (J \it>

ua. (il.

~

1 0
1-------~-----1

!~!~ RAM Cache ~ !fl~ @Off
Q On

SpHktr
Volumt

Hre you sure you want to replace
"Surouell.sit"?

OD (Cancel) (

Replace all

PToolb

lei appsf I
G:::::> lchthus

D Falcon

OE<l:J

c:i fonts/DR's
CJ FullWrite
Cl Quark 3.0
Cl Quicken
Cl Utllltles
Cl Word

)

1.11"'- I

[oio

~

_........_, ..

~

__ .............................
,,

~

~

Figure 5-3. Familiar window examples

..,.. Window Fundamentals

215

As the Macintosh toolbox grew and developers became more facile
with Macintosh programming techniques, greater amounts of functionality and features were crammed into a smaller number of windows. Dialog boxes were loaded with controls and combined with
other dialogs. On a few occasions, they even became the entire user
interface. Document windows became increasingly adorned with miniature controls, split views, and menubars. The distinction between
document windows and control panels, not particularly clear to begin
with, became even more blurred.

I By the Way .,.. I

Perhaps Apple's Control Panel started this functional explosion.
This window is the prime example of features jam-packed into a
too-tiny window: the General 'cdev' (Control Panel device) contains three custom controls and sports two main subareas, one of
which is again divided seven more times.
For the sake of discussion, we'll call these "subwindow" areas views.
Other names, such as panes, panels, display partitions, have been
used for this conceptual domain. As far as Toolbox Managers are
concerned, the management of views inside of a window isn't supported to any great degree:
• QuickDraw deals with drawing areas on a GrafPort basis. The
ability to set a clipping region (via the GetClip(), SetClip(), and
ClipRect() traps) and redefine a GrafPort's coordinate system (via
the SetOrigin() trap) is useful in view management, but it alone
doesn't constitute a view management package.
• The Control Manager doesn't quite go as far as we might like; the
control implementation is adequate for simple buttons, scrollbars,
and sliders, but doesn't go much beyond that. Implementing a
custom control definition procedure, or CDEF, is elaborate, precluding streamlined development and testing. Additionally, it's
difficult to direct keystroke events to specific controls, which
might be useful for text entry, for example.
• The Dialog Manager, while a great solution for simple modal data
entry, is sluggish and nearly unusable for applications that require multiple instances of modeless windows.
The harsh reality is that the tasks required of view support have to
be tackled by application engineers on a window-by-window, view-

216

Iii- Chapter 5

Applied Graphics Techniques

by-view basis. The lack of a bonafide "View Manager" forces developers to either write their own or to make a special case of each view by
writing a separate controlling routine called from the main event loop.
Note..,.

If you're familiar with MacApp, you probably know that it uses and
implements views and even calls them "views." Software developers and marketers who implement or reverse-engineer an existing
good product or idea tend to rush to their thesauruses for a "better"
name. We didn't want to rename the view concept, so we chose the
term "view" for its descriptive value rather than its ''MacAppness."

The notion of a view is still vague, so let's tighten it up a bit. Some
schools of software development consider a view a window; others
insist that each and every discrete object in a window is, in fact, a
view. There are some good reasons behind both "viewpoints." For the
sake of discussion, here's a working definition that lies somewhere in
between these extremes:
• Single data display - Each view is dedicated to the display and
control of a single functional aspect. A view can contain more
than one object, such as a group of controls or other indicators,
but all objects in the group should be closely related.
• One coordinate system - A view should display information
and handle events in view-local coordinates. These are calculated
relative to the view boundaries rather than those of the owning
window.
• One purpose - The role of any view should be able to be
described in one or two sentences.
Additionally, views can be nested, that is, a view can contain other
views or subviews. Ideally, view nesting should be limited to one
level; deeper nesting tends to obscure the purpose of the window and
confuse the user. Analyzing the Control Panel in Figure 5-4 by these
criteria, we can conclude that there are seven views.

.,..

Window Fundamentals

217

Control Panel
Rate of lnsedion
Point Blinking

IN ITPicker- 2 .0
!Color-Desk c...
After- Dar-k
ApFont cdev

1 2

Big Pat
ColorlgniSound cdev
Keyboat·d
Kolor- cdev
MacEnvy
Map
Monitor-s
Mouse
SCS IPr-obe c...
Sound
Stadup Device
T'w' Cache Car-d
UnScr-olly

3 ·:::1:::·0 0
@

Desktop Pattern

Slow

Menu Blinking

Time

(9

1:56:34 PM

Fast

~:

@ 12hr-. 0 24hr-.

0 00@ Date llJi]
Off

2

3

1/22/91

I~

3 .3.2

Oon
@off

SpeakerVolume

Figure 5-4. The Control Panel and its views
This definition is meant to be nothing more than a guideline to
clarify and simplify the construction of complex windows. You can
cram as many items into a view as you want and give each one its
own coordinate system. However, a confused user probably won't
become a frequent user, so strive to keep your windows as simple and
concise as possible. The ideal application consists of a relatively small
set of simple, powerful tools, each with a minimum of functional
modes and variations. Windows and menus are devoid of rarely used
options and capabilities.
An in-depth discussion of views and view handling is outside of the
scope of this book. However, there are some components of view
handling which present fundamental techniques for onscreen graphic
display, particularly in the management of window regions.

218

.,.. Chapter 5

Applied Graphics Techniques

.,... Focusing
MacApp implements a particularly useful concept known as focusing.
A focused view resembles a well-behaved window in the following
respects:
• private local coordinate system, with (0, O) in the upper-left comer
• use of a GrafPort
• all drawing operations clipped to its boundary
These view features are implemented by carefully maintaining the
owning window's GrafPort. This involves a small amount of setup
before allowing each view to render its contents. An example of
focusing routines is shown in Listing 5-2.
Listing 5-2: A focusing routine
void Port_Focus(
void
*srcPort,
RgnHandle boundsRgn,
Rect
*boundsR,
Point
originCoord
GrafPtr
Rect

savedPort;
portBoundsR;

/* determine and set port to work upon */
if (srcPort == NULL)
srcPort = thePort;
/* make the target port current */
GetPort( &savedPort ) ;
SetPort( (GrafPtr)srcPort );
/* determine boundary to use: region or rect */
if ((boundsRgn ==NULL) && (boundsR ==NULL))
{

portBoundsR = ((GrafPtr)srcPort)->portRect;
boundsR = &portBoundsR;

SetOrigin( -originCoord.h, -originCoord.v );

~

Window Fundamentals

219

/* set the clipRgn to the view's boundary*/
if (boundsRgn !=NULL)
SetClip( boundsRgn ) ;
else
ClipRect( boundsR ) ;
SetPort( savedPort ) ;

This routine allows for focusing to either a region or a rectangle.
Listing 5-3 shows how a window might use focusing for rendering a
list of views.
Listing 5-3. Rendering views, with focusing
void Window_RenderViews(
WindowPtr
theWindowP
ViewListHdl
ViewListEntry
Rect
Point

theViewList;
*curviewP;
originR;
originPt;

theViewList
(ViewListHdl)GetWRefCon( theWindowP ) ;
if (theViewList !=NULL)
{

curViewP = *theViewList;
while (curViewP != NULL)
{

/* determine the view origin */
if (curViewP->boundsRgn != NULL)
originR
(**(curViewP->boundsRgn)) .rgnBBox;
else
originR
curViewP->boundsR;
SetPt( &originPt, originR.left, originR.top );
/* focus the view */
Port_Focus(
theWindowP, curViewP->boundsRgn,
&(curViewP->boundsR), originPt );
/* invoke the view render procedure */
/* to draw the view's contents */
RenderView( curViewP );

220

.,.. Chapter 5 Applied Graphics Techniques

/* go to the next view */
curViewP = curViewP->nextEntry ;

/ * restore the window to "normal " clipping and origin values * /
SetOrigin( 0 , 0 ) ;
ClipRect( &(theWindowP->portRect) ) ;

The main objective of focusing is to set up the GrafPort in such a
way that a view "thinks" it owns the GrafPort at the same time it's
being prevented from drawing outside of its borders. Figure 5-5 illustrates the difference between focused and unfocused views, as they
appear to a view-rendering routine.

•

Actual
Location
lgniSound cdev
Keyboard
Ko lor cdev
MacEnvy
Map
Monitors
Mouse
SCSIProbe c ...
Sound
Startup Device
HI Cache Card
UnScr olly

Menu Blinking

~
.

0 00@
Off t 2 3

Point Blinking

::0 1'::
@00
Slow
Fast

Time

C9

1:56:34 PM
@ 12hr . 0 24hr.
Date

~

4 3 2 -

1-

1/22/ 91

0

[;J Oon

Speaker
Volume

@off

•

7 6 -

5 -

RAM Cache ~

3.3.2

Where the
view thinks it
is located

Rate of Insertion

Control Panel

Desktop Pattern

When a view is focused, it acts as though it were in the upper-left corner
of the window regardless of its actual location.

Figure 5-5. Focused and unfocused views

1111>

Window Fundamentals

221

Focusing eliminates the need for view rendering routines that concern themselves with their absolute location within a window, as well
as paying attention to their boundaries when rendering. When a view
is focused, it acts as though it were in the upper-left corner of the
window regardless of its actual location. As far as the routine is
concerned, the upper-left corner of the view is (0, 0), and clipping is
set to permit the entire view to be drawn into, while protecting
everything outside of the view's boundaries from being drawn over.
liJJ.

Basic Window Event-Handling Techniques
The interactive communication between the user and application is
carried out through the transmission of events. Events are usually tied
to a single window and typically tied to a particular region within
that window.
Activate Events

Responding graphically to active events is generally fairly simple. If a
document window becomes active (that is, is the new front window)
it makes sense to make its GrafPort the current port via a SetPort()
call. Any graphic object that has an associated selection range should
be made visible on activation, and hidden upon window deactivation.
No explicit drawing should take place; if some window object needs
to be redrawn, then it should be invalidated and redrawn within the
routine or method that handles the ensuing update event.
In the case of other window types, handling an activate event is
even less involved. Modal windows are presumably only going to
exist as front windows; hence the deactivated state can and should be
ignored.
For tool palette windows, the issues are somewhat more complex. A
tool window should appear to float above document windows, and its
appearance shouldn't change in response to activation, nor should the
appearance of any other windows change when a tool window is selected. Unfortunately, the Window Manager doesn't fully support the
"floating" aspect of tool palettes. Calling SelectWindow() will cause
the current front window to lose its highlighting and receive a deactivate event. The BringToFront() trap can be used instead, provided
that the application can discriminate between its document and tool
windows. The example in Listing 5-4 illustrates these issues.

222

~

Chapter 5 Applied Graphics Techniques

Listing 5-4. Handling mouse clicks in a non-front window
if (theMousedWindow

!=

FrontWindow())

{

if (Application_IsToolWindow( theMousedWindow ))
BringToFront( theMousedWindow ) ;
else
SelectWindow( theMousedWindow ) ;

The Application_IsToolWindow() routine would determine whether
the "theMousedWindow" is a tool window or not, possibly by comparing the window's pointer or refCon values against a list of such
values maintained by the application itself.
Update Events

The update event is the point at which an application makes the results
of graphic operations visible in a window. This presentation typically
involves drawing directly into a window, as shown in Listing 5-5.
Listing 5-5. Basic update event routine
void DoUpdateEvent(
WindowPtr theWindowP
GrafPtr

savedPort;

if ( theWindowP
RETURN;

NULL)

/* save current GrafPort */
GetPort( &savedPort );
SetPort( theWindowP );

BeginUpdate( theWindowP ) ;
I* render the contents of the window */
ForeColor( redColor ) ;
TextFont( newYork );
TextSize( 48 ) ;
MoveTo( 10, 100 ) ;
Drawstring( "\pThis space for rent." ) ;
ForeColor( blackColor ) ;

..,,. Window Fundamentals

223

/* draw all controls and grow icon */
DrawControls( theWindowP ) ;
DrawGrowicon( theWindowP ) ;
EndUpdate( theWindowP ) ;
/* restore original GrafPort */
SetPort( savedPort ) ;

Listing 5-5 illustrates the following important points:
• The GrafPort of the updating window might not be the current
GrafPort, probably because that window isn't front-most.
• The use of the BeginUpdate() and EndUpdate() traps to restrict
the performed drawing to only those window areas that need to
be redrawn. BeginUpdate() restricts the performed drawing to
only those window areas that need to be redrawn, by temporarily
setting the window's visRgn equal to the intersection of the clipRgn,
visRgn, and updateRgn. The updateRgn is then disposed of. EndUpdate() merely restores the visRgn to the appropriate area. This
determination is made by the Window Manager, which takes the
union of the window's structRgn and contRgn and subtracts the
regions defined by overlapping portions of all windows in front
of the updating window.
• The updating routine is responsible for all graphics that reside in
the content region, including all controls. The routine is also
responsible for drawing the grow region. DrawGrowlconO calls
the window's definition proc, or WDEF, which renders the grow
icon only if the window is frontmost and its type is a resizable
one (documentProc or zoomBoxProc). DrawGrowlcon() will also
draw two lines 15 pixels away from the right side and bottom of
the window, where it expects the application has placed two
scrollbars. The updating routine is not responsible for the window's
frame controls; those are handled directly by the WDEF.
This covers the basics of handling update events by drawing directly
into a window. If an application's graphic requirements can be met with a
small number of graphic commands, then this technique is sufficient.
Most applications fall into this category. For graphics-intensive applications where the displayed graphics aren't easily rendered, an offscreen
technique is preferable. The GWorld-buffered window approach is appropriate for applications that handle CAD, drafting, or paint documents.
This technique involves the following steps:

224

II>-

Chapter 5

Applied Graphics Techniques

• When creating a window, allocate a GWorld equal in size to the
largest piece of the document to be rendered. If the document is
small, then the GWorld's size can be equal to that of the document. However, if the document is very large (for example, a 32bit, 4000-by-4000-pixel document), then the document may have
to be rendered in pieces, as the memory requirements of the
GWorld may be significantly greater than that which is available.
• Draw the window's contents, excluding controls and growboxes,
into the GWorld rather than into the window.
• When an update event occurs, use CopyBits() to transfer the
GWorld's graphic contents into the window.
This methodology generally yields the best performance with the
most optimal color mapping available. Unfortunately, it places a potentially substantial demand for additional heap memory, and requires the presence of Color QuickDraw version 1.0. The decision
whether to rely on offscreen or onscreen drawing techniques belongs
to the developer and is one that should be made carefully.

.,.. Desktop Interactions
Windows exist within the context of the Desktop. The Desktop is the
"global" GrafPort or CGrafPort and is equal to the union of all visible
areas on every active display card. There are a small number of
situations in which applications need to be concerned with the interactions between its window and the Desktop.
A pointer to the Desktop' s port can be obtained with either the
GetWMgrPort() or GetCWMgrPort() traps. This port should be treated
as a read-only entity, as modifications to it will affect all executing
applications.
Display Boundaries

Prior to the introduction of the Macintosh II line; the screen of a
Classic Macintosh was described by "screenBits", a BitMap in the
application's global memory. This variable was initialized by the
application's call to the InitGraf() trap and could be used to determine
the screen's boundary. This was often used as shown in Listing 5-6.

..,. Window Fundamentals

225

Listing 5-6. Old-style usage of screenBits
void InitDesktopBoundsRects( void )
{

Rect dragLimitR , growLimitR ;
dragLimitR = screenBits.bounds;
dragLimitR . top += GetMBarHeight();
InsetRect( &dragLimitR , 2, 2 ) ;
/ * set grow limit r ect maximum and minimum size limits . * /
growLimitR . left = 70 ;
growLimitR.top = 50;
/* Note : maximums are arbitrary ; make as large as necessary */
growLimitR . right = screenBits.bounds . right;
growLimitR.bottom = screenBits.bounds . bottom ;

With the handling of multiple display monitors, this technique became inadequate. It' s quite possible to configure a multiple monitor
desktop so that the area isn't even rectangular. The solution can be
found in the GetGrayRgnO trap, which returns a reference to the
Desktop' s visible region. This region's bounding rectangle can be used
in place of "screenBits.bounds" to define common window limits.
Recognize that this rectangle may contain areas that aren't visible, as
shown in Figure 5-6.

I
I

11

Dashed line is
"Bounding Rect''

I

IL _ _ _ _ _ _ _

Figure 5-6. Non-rectangular desktop

226

~

Chapter 5

Applied Graphics Techniques

Since the region returned by GetGrayRgnO belongs to the System, it
should be treated as read-only and copied if the application needs to
modify it.
Windows, Palettes, and Multiple Monitors
A number of peculiar situations can arise when working with multiple display of different capabilities for which applications may need
to be accountable. The most important conditions are the following:
• A family of windows that extends across multiple devices and
shares a common palette may appear differently, even when one
of them becomes the frontmost window. Changes to the window
order will only cause entry stealing for those windows that are all
or partially on the same indexed display as the new front window. Windows that are entirely on other displays will be unaffected, even if other windows in their palette family experience
entry stealing. A crude but effective solution to this problem is to
temporarily make a window on the other devices the frontmost
window via SelectWindow(), restoring the original frontmost window afterward.
• Since a window can extend across displays of differing capabilities,
the window's portPixMap (or portBits) cannot be used to determine information about the window's display state. CopyBits()
and other raster-oriented traps will recognize PixMaps and BitMaps
as belonging to a window by comparing their baseAddr field's
value to that of the Main GDevice PixMap (this value is also
stored in the System global scrnBase); if they are the same, then
the operation is performed repeatedly for every area that falls on
a separate monitor, as shown in Figure 5-7.
• Versions 6.1.7 and earlier of the Finder don't use the Palette
Manager. Applications that have demanding palettes that cause
frequent entry stealing can leave the appearance of Finder window frames with exotic patches of strange colors.

..,.. Introduction to Document Organization

!D

A Window

There isn't

any discontinui

1A1hon !:l \A_
P

tt_dn1A1 l'Q__IJorc m

VVll"ll U

227

V--v-J'\

monitors

Figure 5-7. Drawing into window covering three displays

~

Introduction to Document Organization
By this point, we' ve pretty much covered the general theories of
offscreen and onscreen drawing, while detailing some of the important constraints and requirements inherent to both methods. Now
we're going to look at specific techniques for maintaining a model of
some "user-presentable" graphics and getting a representation of that
model out to the user quickly and accurately.
Applications maintain a model of the graphics that they render.
Whether that model is explicitly understood by the programmers who
wrote the application is of no consequence: The model does exist. It
may be expressed simply as the state of a few application variables, or
it may be a sprawling database of point values whose rendering
involves hundreds of routines external to the application itself. The
degree to which an application is aware of its intended presentation
model, and to which it organizes and manages those data structures
that affect it, defines the flexibility of the graphics model and the ease
with which it can be accommodated into the Desktop environment.
The applicable object programming term here is encapsulation. Encapsulating a programming solution means tightly defining the inputs, outputs, and operations that can be performed on a collection of
related data objects - the essence of a graphics model. Developing a
graphics model that relies heavily on global variables or a wide range
of unrelated utility routines is difficult to encapsulate. The concept of

228

..,.. Chapter 5 Applied Graphics Techniques

an object class is the attempt to provide a syntactical structure within
a programming language to facilitate encapsulated data models. There
are C and Pascal environments available to Macintosh programmers
that support objects and object programming techniques and concepts. Consider employing their object facilities when designing the
document structure for your applications .

..,. Rasterizing
Rasterization is the process in which graphics operations are committed
to pixel values. For most modern-day computer display technologies,
rasterization is a necessary process. Rasterized graphics have advantages and disadvantages over nonrasterized graphics. These relative
advantages and disadvantages should be well understood by anyone
attempting to develop a serious graphics-intensive application.
QuickDraw' s GraNerb-based drawing traps are inherently nonraster
objects: The tokenized results of GraNerb traps stored in pictures are
also not rasterized, nor are PostScript commands. Within QuickDraw,
rasterization occurs whenever drawing commands take place within a
regular or color GrafPort (or CGrafPort) in such a way that the port's
pixel values are altered. The main differences between raster and
nonraster graphic objects are the following:
• Raster is faster or slower - Scaling calculations involving horizontal, vertical, and pixel depth must be made for every rasterized
graphic operation. The transfer of one raster buffer (or PixMap) to
another can be considered a single graphics operation. In most
cases it's preferable to render complex graphics composed of
numerous command-oriented operations into an offscreen GWorld
and use CopyBits() to copy it to the destination GDevice. Even
though this may take more execution cycles, the result will usually appear to be faster.
• Raster is bigger - A filled rectangle can be described by a Rect
structure along with the pen state variables that affect it. The
pixel representation of a filled rectangle will take orders of magnitude more memory.
• Raster is dumber - Unfortunately, rasterization loses most of the
information associated with the rasterized graphic object. It's
simple enough for an application to remember that it drew a
circle into a PixMap; to find the pixels affected by the rasterization
in the PixMap itself and then determine that those pixels indeed
compose a circle is a nontrivial exercise in pattern recognition.

..,. Introduction to Document Organization

229

Rasterizing graphic objects improperly is the primary cause of aliasing.
In order to prevent aliasing, the original, nonrasterized graphics commands should be preserved whenever possible. Scaling operations,
which cause rasterized objects to develop those ugly jagged edges
familiar to most computer users, generally do not affect nonraster
graphic objects.
When to Rasterize?
Rasterizing constrains graphic objects according to the rules of the
GDevice and PixMap into which the object was rendered, particularly
the horizontal and vertical resolution, and the color space resolution.
Preferably, rasterization should be performed on a "demand" basis
only when displaying graphics on a raster display.

..,. Document Rendering Techniques
Now that the importance of a graphics presentation model is understood, let's fit it into the Desktop environment.
What and When to Render?
Within the Macintosh environment, there are three distinct conditions
under which an application is directed to render its graphic model:
• the update event
• a print command
• a Clipboard command (Cut or Copy)
With the advent of System 7.0, the Clipboard command set has been
extended. A subscriber can request a publishing application to render
a graphic object in a manner similar to the more familiar Copy command.
Essentially, the request implied by all of these situations is the same:
draw the graphic-requested objects. Unfortunately, the constraints imposed by each rendering situation can preclude the use of a single,
generalized rendering routine. With care, the same rendering routine
can be used, assuming the proper precautions are taken.
Update Events
As discussed earlier in this chapter, update event processing will
configure the window's GrafPort or CGrafPort so that drawing cannot
occur outside of the area to be redrawn. This process is intended to be

230

~

Chapter 5 Applied Graphics Techniques

transparent to the application, and the rendering routine is supposed
to pretend that it should draw the entire graphic, even if that graphic
is substantially larger that the invalid area itself. For update routines
that don't use any raster onscreen techniques, some performance
improvement can be realized by examining the window's visRgn and
explicitly clipping its drawing operations to that region by ignoring
every graphic object that doesn't intersect it, rather than relying on
QuickDraw to perform all of the clipping internally at the pixel level.

Clipboard Operations
Compared to update events, Clipboard operations often require the
entire graphic to be rendered. Although any subselection rendering is
up the the user, the tools for making such selections must be implemented and provided to the user by the application itself. The rendering should be unaffected by window or display limitation.

Printing the Rendered Document

I

When an application receives a printing request, it must undertake a
fairly involved process beginning with the optional presentation of
printing dialogs and culminating in the page-by-page rendering of the
graphic into a GrafPort specially configured by the Printing Manager
and the associated print driver. The application is responsible for
determining the number of pages required to print the entire graphic
and calculating the rectangles for each page. The application must not
change the port or device while the printing port is open.
With all of these constraints well understood, let's dive into a couple of
Window classes that address these concerns in a direct, concise fashion .

..,. Printing
As mentioned briefly in the previous section, Macintosh printing is
essentially a page-oriented rendering operation that occurs within a
specially prepared GrafPort or CGrafPort rather than a window. Most
programmers are also aware of the fact that many of the popular
Apple-compatible printing devices render graphics in a PostScript
rather than a QuickDraw environment. These two factors, along with
the handling of the standard Print and Page Setup dialogs, are the
three most important issues facing developers who require hardcopy
output from their applications.

~

~

Printing

231

Overview of the Printing Process
The printing process is typically initiated by the user, and its implementation involves a joint effort between the application, the Printing
Manager, print drivers, and, ultimately, the printer and its page description language. This process proceeds as follows:
1. The user selects Print from the application's or the Finder's File
menu. The document (or documents) to be printed is usually
represented by the icons selected in the Finder, or the one associated with the frontmost window of the application.
2. If printing from the Finder, the application is launched.
3. The application opens the current print driver, prepares a TPrint
record, and passes it to PrJobDlog(), which presents the Standard
Print dialog. The application may also present its own print
dialog, if needed. The user either cancels the dialog, aborting the
process, or OKs it.
4. The application opens the printer port via the PrOpenDoc() trap,
which creates and configures the port and returns a reference to it
back to the application.
5. The application, using the rlnfo field within the TPrint record's
TPrlnfo substructure, determines the available printing area. Using this rectangle as a "window" into the document, the application opens a print page via the PrOpenPage() trap, renders that
portion of the document's contents, and closes the page via the
PrClosePage() trap. The process is repeated for all pages within
the range specified in the TPrint record.
6. The application closes the printer port via the PrCloseDoc() trap.
If the user selected draft mode printing, the application must
then call the PrPicFile() trap to print the rasterized print image.
The application's printing work is now finished.
7. If draft mode printing wasn't selected, then the printer driver
goes to work. If the printer uses a page description language
other than QuickDraw, then the driver converts all QuickDraw
tokens into the appropriate command language program.
8. The resulting page description language command stream is executed by the printer device, which hopefully prints the document in short order.

232

..,. Chapter 5 Applied Graphics Techniques

The process described here doesn't account for print spooling. An
example of handling application print duties is contained in the
CWindo object described later in this chapter.

..,. Print Data Structures
Some of the important printing data strudures are listed in the following sections.
TPrint, TPrlnfo

As described previously, the TPrint record contains user-specified
information as set by its actions within the standard Print dialog. Of
particular interest to the application are the page range, print mode,
and type of printer port to render into (color I grayscale or black/
white). This data type is usually referenced through a THPrint, a type
defined as a Handle to a TPrint record. A TPrint record contains a
TPrlnfo record as one of its fields, which contains available print
rectangle and resolution information (see Listing 5-7).
Listing 5-7. TPrint and TPrlnfo
typedef struct TPrinfo
{

short
short
short
Re ct

iDev;
iVRes;
iHRes;
rPage;

} ;

typedef struct TPrint
{

short
TPrinf o
Rect
TPrStl
TPrinfo
TPrXInfo
TPrJob:
short

iPrVersion;
prinfo;
rPaper;
prStl;
prinfoPT;
prXInfo;
prJob;
printX[19];

TPrint, **THPrint;

..,. Printing

233

TPrPort

This data structure is essentially a GrafPort or CGrafPort whose bottleneck procedures (see Chapter 2) have been set to handle the specialized requirements of the print driver and the destination printer's
page description language.
~

Important Print Traps
The Printing Manager is composed of a relatively small number of
traps and data types. The more important ones are described here.
PrDefault(), PrValidate()

These traps initialize a TPrint record through a THPrint reference
according to the requirements of the current print driver.
PrStlDlog()

This trap takes a THPrint argument and displays the standard Page
Setup dialog. If the user selects OK, the trap configures the associated
TPrint record according to the setting of the dialog. The printer's page
rectangle can be adjusted here. This trap returns TRUE if the user
selected the dialog's OK button, and FALSE otherwise.
PrJobDlog()

This trap takes a THPrint argument and displays the standard Print
dialog. If the user selects OK, the trap configures the associated TPrint
record according to the settings of the dialog. The printer port's type
(GrafPort or CGrafPort) can be set, along with the print mode, printed
page range, and further adjustments to the printed page's rectangle.
This trap returns TRUE if the user selected the dialog's OK button,
and FALSE otherwise.
PrOpenDoc(), PrCloseDocO

PrOpenDoc() allocates and initializes the appropriate type of printing
port (CGrafPort or GrafPort), installs the necessary bottleneck procedure pointers, and returns a reference to it back to the application.
PrCloseDoc() deallocates the printer port, writes a temporary print
data file, and invokes the printer driver to process it.

234

~

Chapter 5 Applied Graphics Techniques

PrOpenPage(), PrClosePage()

These two traps open and close a single printer page. The application
is responsible for calculating the source rectangle within its representation model; however, the destination rectangle is always the same
and can be retrieved from the THPrint reference.
PrGeneral()

This trap allows the application to access and modify additional features specific to the current printer driver. Among other things, it can
be used to determine the selected page orientation (portrait or landscape) and set the printer's horizontal and vertical resolution values.
lllJi-

A Basic Window Object
The CWindo class is what's known as an abstract superclass. This means
that CWindo objects generally don't exist by themselves, rather that
CWindo is meant to be used as a foundation for other classes that will
derive much of their behavior from it .

...,. Objectives
The CWindo class provides a sensible rendering scheme for all drawing situations, as discussed earlier in the "Document Rendering Techniques" section. Updating, printing, and clipboard operations all
reference a single Render method.
Avoiding crashes due to referencing nonexistent System facilities is a
very important CWindo design objective. The creation of windows may
be undertaken by any one of four Window Manager traps: NewWindow(),
GetNewWindow(), NewCWindow(), and GetNewCWindow(). The
latter two are only available with Color QuickDraw. The two methods
in the CWindo class that create windows check to see which one is
appropriate before making the trap call. All other methods that utilize
QuickDraw use only Classic QuickDraw trap calls.
Another important aspect of the CWindo class is its ability to link
CWindo objects together and search that linked list for individual
members. This feature allows simple event handling and is particularly useful when keeping track of even a small number of windows.

.,_ A Basic Window Object

~

235

Class Definition
The full definition of the CWindo class is shown in Listing 5-8.
Listing 5-8. CWindo class definition
struct Windo: indirect
long
Windo

objectID;
*nextObject;

/* housekeeping aid */
/* next article in the list */

WindowPtr
short

theWindowP;
windResID;

/* the genuine window article */
/* window resource ID, */
/* if applicable */

Rect
Re ct

growBoundsR;
dragBoundsR;

/* resizing limits */
/* drag movement limits */

Boolean

doBackClicks; /*
/*
curEvent;
/*
lastEvent;
/*

EventRecord
EventRecord

handle mouse click if not */
front window? */
event to consider */
last event processed */

THPrint

printinginfo; /* print and page setup */
/* information */

void
unsigned long

*extraData;
/*object's private data*/
extraDataLen; /* sizeof( object's private */
/* data ) */

void Init( void);

/* set to known empty state */

void Dispose( void ) ;

/*close window; delete object */

/* methods to handle linked lists of CWindo objects */
/* link another CWindo to */
void AddindObject(
Windo *addedObject );
I* this one */
Windo* KillindObject(
Windo *dyingObject );

/* remove linked CWindo from */
I* this */

short CountObjects( void);

I* count CWindos linked to */
/* this one */

236

..,,. Chapter 5

Applied Graphics Techniques

Windo* GetindObject(
short objindex );

/* get nth linked CWindo */

long GetObjectID( void ) ;

/* get objectID value */

void SetObjectID(
long newObjectID ) ;

/* set new objectID value */

Windo* GetObjectByID(
long targetObjectID ) ;

/* find linked CWindo, */
/* by ID value */

WindowPtr GetWindow( void ) ;

/* obtain owned window ptr */

void SetWindow(
WindowPtr theWindowP ) ;

/* set new window ptr */

.

OSErr Create(
*wStorage,
void
Rect
*boundsunsigned,
short
wProcID,
char
*wTitle,
short
isVisible,
Boolean hasGoAway ) ;

/* analogous to NewWindow() */
/* trap */

OSErr CreateRes(
*wStorage,
void
theWindID ) ;
short

/* analogous to GetNewWindow() */
/* trap */

void GetDocSize(
*width,
short
*height ) ;
short

/* get current maximum window */
/* dimensions */

void SetDocSize(
short
width,
short
height);

/* set maximum window dimensions */

OSErr Render(
/* •• VIRTUAL •• *!
void
*desiredArea,
/* draw window contents */
short
boundsType,
situation ) ;
short
/* determine bounds within */
Boolean GetRenderBounds(
*desiredArea, /* which to draw */
void
boundsType,
short
*boundsR,
Rect
*boundsRgn ) ;
RgnHandle

.,.. A Basic Window Object

OSErr DoPageSetup( void ) ;

237

/* handle and display "Page */

I* Setup... " dialog */
I* print entire document in */
/* pages */

OSErr DoPrint( void ) ;

OSErr DoClipCopy{ void

) ;

Boolean IsWindowEvent(
EventRecord *theEvent ) ;

/* copy to the Clipboard *I

I* does this event pertain to *I
I* this window? */

/* process the event
short DoWindowEvent(
Event Record *theEvent ) ;

*I

/* determine which linked*/
Windo* FindWindowEvent(
EventRecord *theEvent ) ; I* window "owns" the event */

/* specific event handlers called by DoWindowEvent() method*/
void DoActivate( void);
/*handle activate event*/

};

void DoUpdate( void ) ;

/* handle update event */

Boolean DoKeyDown( void);

/*handle key down event*/

Boolean DoMouseDown(
short theWindowPart ) ;

/* handle mouse down event

Boolean DoDrag( void ) ;

/* handle mouse down in */
/* drag event */

Boolean DoGoAway( void ) ;

/* handle mouse down in go-away *I
/* box event */

Boolean DoZoom(
short theWindowPart ) ;

/* handle mouse down in zoom */
/* box event */

Boolean DoGrow( void ) ;

/* handle mouse down in grow */
/* region event */

void Resizeview(
Point newDimension );

/* resize a window *I

void InvalidateView(
Boolean doEraseAlso ) ;

I* invalidate an entire window */

*I

238

..,.. Chapter 5 Applied Graphics Techniques

..,. Public Methods
The CWindo class may seem quite large, but in fact there are only a
small number of methods that programmers need to be concerned
with. These methods are called public methods. The other methods
and instance variables are considered private and are intended for
internal use only by other CWindo methods. The public methods are
described in the following sections.
You may also note in Listing 5-8 that some of the method declarations are commented as being "virtual." A virtual method is one that is
intended to serve as a placeholder or stub. Such methods should be
overridden, or replaced, by classes which are derived from CWindo.
Since Think C 4.0 doesn' t support virtual methods explicitly, those
CWindo methods which are considered virtual are so noted with
comments.
Note~

Complete source code for the CWindo class can be found on the
Source Code Disk.
Init(), Dispose()

Init() initializes the object's private variables, or instance variables.
Dispose() deallocates any dynamic memory allocation referenced by
the instance variables.
Create(), CreateRes()

These methods create a window and initialize the object's fields concerned with growing and dragging the window. Create() creates a
window from scratch, whereas CreateRes() builds one from an available 'WIND' resource. The source to Create() is shown in Listing 5-9.
Listing 5-9. CWindo :: Create() method
OSErr CWindo : : Create(
vo i d
*wStorage,
Rect
*boundsR,
short
wProcID ,
unsigned char
*wTitle ,
short
isVisible,
Boolean
hasGoAway )

.,. A Basic Window Object

RgnHandle
SysEnvRec
Re ct

239

screenBoundsRgn;
curSysinfo;
localBoundsR;

if (wTitle == NULL)
wTitle = "\p";
if (boundsR == NULL)
{

SetRect( &localBoundsR, 0, 0, 100, 100 );
boundsR = &localBoundsR;

/* create the window */
(void)SysEnvirons( curSysEnvVers, &curSysinfo ) ;
if (curSysinfo.hasColorQD)
this->theWindowP =
NeWCWindow(
(Ptr)wStorage, boundsR, (char*)wTitle, isVisible,
wProcID, (WindowPtr) (-1), hasGoAway, OL);
else
this->theWindowP =
NewWindow(
(Ptr)wStorage, boundsR, (char*)wTitle, isVisible,
wProcID, (WindowPtr) (-1), hasGoAway, OL);
if (->theWindowP ! = NULL)
return (OSErr) (-1);
screenBoundsRgn = GetGrayRgn();
this-> dragBoundsR = (**screenBoundsRgn) .rgnBBox;
this-> dragBoundsR.top += GetMBarHeight();
SetRect(
&(this->growBoundsR), 30, 30,
(**screenBoundsRgn) .rgnBBox.right,
(**screenBoundsRgn) .rgnBBox.bottom ) ;
SetPort( this->theWindowP );
return noErr;

Render(), GetRenderBounds()

This method is a "virtual" method - one that serves as a placeholder
for one implemented by those subclasses derived from it. The Render()
method of the CWindo class simply erases the window. The "situa-

240

.,.. Chapter 5 Applied Graphics Techniques

tion" argument indicates whether the "desiredArea" argument is a
RgnHandle or a Rect. GetRenderBounds() is used to make further
determinations about the area to be rendered. The "situation" argument indicates which of the three rendering cases is requested.
Subclasses of CWindo should implement a Render() method that
meets the following criteria: no extra redrawing of pixels onscreen to
avoid flicker, and an ability to handle either color or monochrome
GrafPorts.
The source to Render() is shown in Listing 5-10.
Listing 5-10. CWindo::Render method
OSErr CWindo: :Render(
*desiredArea,
void
short boundsType,
short situation )
RgnHandle
Re ct

/*

.. VIRTUAL .. */

I* area to be drawn */
I* Rect, Rgn or ??? */

/* update, copy, print or ??? *I

boundsRgn;
boundsR;

if (!this->GetRenderBounds(
desiredArea, boundsType, &boundsR, &boundsRgn ))
return (OSErr) (-1);
if (boundsRgn !=NULL)
EraseRgn( (RgnHandle)desiredArea ) ;
else
EraseRect( &boundsR ) ;
return noErr;
<CWindo: :Render method>

DoUpdate(), DoClipCopy(), DoPrint()

These methods prepare the port to be rendered into, determine the
area to be rendered, and call the Render() method to draw the graphics within the specified area.
The source to DoUpdate() is shown in Listing 5-11.
Listing 5-11. CWindo::DoUpdate method
void CWindo::DoUpdate( void)
{

Graf Ptr

savedPort;

..,_ A Basic Window Object

RgnHandle
Point
OS Err

241

updateBounds;
globalOffset;
errStat;

if (this->theWindowP
RETURN;

NULL)

/* save current GrafPort */
GetPort( &savedPort ) ;
SetPort( this->theWindowP ) ;

updateBounds = NewRgn();
if (updateBounds != NULL)
{

CopyRgn(
((CWindowPeek) (this->theWindowP))->updateRgn,
updateBounds ) ;
globalOffset.h = globalOffset.v = O;
LocalToGlobal( &globalOffset ) ;
OffsetRgn( updateBounds, -globalOffset.h, -globalOffset.v ) ;

BeginUpdate( this->theWindowP ) ;
errStat = this->Render(
updateBounds, SHAPE_Rgn, DOCREND_update ) ;
DraWControls( this->theWindowP );
DrawGrowicon( this->theWindowP ) ;
EndUpdate( this->theWindowP );
if (updateBounds !=NULL)
DisposeRgn( updateBounds ) ;
/* restore original GrafPort */
SetPort( savedPort ) ;

<CWindo::DoUpdate method>

lsWindowEvent(), FindWindowEventO, Do Event()
These three methods are used to perform the routing and handling of
events associated with an object's windows. FindWindowEvent() will
start with the original object and chain through the object's linked list
pointers until either NULL is encountered or IsWindowEvent() matches
the event argument to the owning CWindo object.
The source to DoUpdate() is shown in Listing 5-12.

242

..,. Chapter 5

Applied Graphics Techniques

Listing 5-12. CWindo::lsWindowEvent method
Boolean CWindo::IsWindowEvent(
EventRecord *theEvent )
WindowPtr
short

theWindow;
pressedWindowPart;

if ((theEvent ==NULL) I I (this->theWindowP
return FALSE;

NULL))

switch (theEvent->what)
case mouseDown:
case mouseUp:
pressedWindowPart
FindWindow( theEvent->where, &theWindow ) ;
return (theWindow == this->theWindowP);
case activateEvt:
case updateEvt:
theWindow = (WindowPtr) (theEvent->message);
return (theWindow == this->theWindowP);
case keyDown:
case autoKey:
if (theEvent->modifiers & cmdKey)
return FALSE;
else
return (this->theWindowP
Front Window ( ) ) ;
case diskEvt:
case app4Evt:
default:
return FALSE;

<CWindo::IsWindowEvent method>

..,_ A GWorld Window Object

~

A GWorld Window Object

~

Objectives

243

CPixBufWindo, an object that implements PixMap-buffered window,
uses the GWorld functionality presented in Chapter 4. Its objectives
are essentially a superset of the CWindo objectives, which make it an
ideal subclass of CWindo. In object programming terms, the CPixBuff
class inherits from CWindo. The inheritance is substantial and results
in a compact object with a few powerful methods that replace, or
override, those identically named in the CWindo class, particularly the
virtually defined Render() method.
As you are now well aware, GWorlds are huge heap monsters. The
chances are low that enough heap memory exists to allocate a GWorld
of the desired pixel depth and planar dimensions, and these chances
decrease with every one allocated. Apple's GWorld usage guidelines
suggest that window update routines that rely on GWorlds should be
prepared to draw directly into the window's port should the offscreen
GWorld be deallocated. The CPixBuff class accommodates this by
allowing for routines that use these objects to install a rendering
procedure into the objects themselves. This allows the window to be
supported whether or not the GWorld is allocated.
~

Class Definition
The full definition of the CPixBuffWindo class is shown in Listing 5-13.
Listing 5-13. CPixBuffWindo class definition
struct CPixBuffWindo: CWindo
{

GWorldPtr
GDHandle
ProcPtr

offWorld;
screenGDev;
altRenderProc;

Boolean

canGWorldPixMap;

Point
long
Ptr

scrollOrigin;
docSize;
docData;

void Init( void ) ;

/* The off-screen pixels *I
/*window's GrafDevice */
/* alternate rendering */
/* routine ptr */
/*working GetGWorldPixMap() */
/* trap present? */
/* current scrolled offset */
I* ?? */
/* ?? *I
/*

OVERRIDE •• */

244

.,.. Chapter 5 Applied Graphics Techniques

void Dispose( void ) ;

/* •• OVERRIDE •• */

Boolean AugmentWindow(
Re ct
*boundsR,
short pixDepth );
void RenderWindow( void);
OSErr Render(
void
*desiredArea,
short boundsType,
short situation ) ;

/* •• OVERRIDE •• */

void InstallAltRenderProc(
ProcPtr newAltRenderProc );
void EraseOffWorld( void ) ;
void GetScreenWorld( void ) ;
void SetScreenWorld( void ) ;
void SetOffWorld( void ) ;
void DisposeOffWorld( void);
};

You may notice that this class has many fewer methods than the
CWindo class from which it's derived. This is because much of the
behavior inherited from the CWindo class can be used without modification of any sort. However, some of the CWindo methods are insufficient
for the CPixBuffWindo class, and will need to be partially or wholly
overridden. In Think C 4.0, overriding isn't explicitly accounted for in
the language, so those CPixBuffWindo methods that override CWindo
methods of the same name are noted with comments.

llll- Public Methods
As with the CWindo class, there are a number of methods which
should be considered public, and the rest are intended for internal use
by other CPixBuffWindo methods. These public methods are described
in the following sections.

~

A GWorld Window Object

245

AugmentWindow()

This method creates an offscreen GWorld to attach to the window. It
accepts arguments for the planar and pixel depth dimensions. If the
GWorld is successfully allocated, the inherited document size is adjusted and TRUE is returned. FALSE is returned on any failure to
allocate the GWorld.
Render()

The Render() method is fairly involved. It handles the rendering of
window contents for the update, clipboard copy, and printing cases,
and for both color and monochrome GrafPorts.
The source to Render() is shown in Listing 5-14.
Listing 5-14. CPixBuffWindo::Render method

..

..

OS Err PixBuffWindo: :Render( I*
OVERRIDE
*I
/* area to be drawn *I
void
*desired.Area,
/* Rect, Rgn or ??? */
short boundsType,
/* update, copy, print or ??? *I
short situation )
CGraf Ptr
GDHandle
PixMapHandle
PixMapPtr
RgnHandle
Rect
Boolean

savedPort;
savedGDev;
srcPM;
destPMPtr;
boundsRgn;
sourceR, destinationR;
isGWorldOK;

/* determine validity of offscreen World */
if (this->offWorld == NULL)
isGWorldOK = FALSE;
else
{

if (this->canGWorldPixMap)
srcPM = GetGWorldPixMap( this->offWorld ) ;
else
srcPM = ((CGrafPtr) (this->offWorld))->portPixMap;
isGWorldOK = LockPixels( srcPM ) ;

/* if offscreen world isn't available, try to use the */
/* alternate or inherited drawing procs */
i f ( ! isGWorldOK)

246.

~

Chapter 5 Applied Graphics Techniques

if (this->altRenderProc != NULL)
(*(this->altRenderProc))
( desired.Area, boundsType, situation ) ;
else
inherited: :Render( desired.Area, boundsType, situation ) ;
return (OSErr) (-1);

/* determine boundaries within which to draw */
if (!this->GetRenderBounds(
desired.Area, boundsType, &sourceR, &boundsRgn ))
return (OSErr) (-1);
destinationR = sourceR;
OffsetRect(
&sourceR, this->scrollOrigin.h, this->scrollOrigin.v ) ;
/* if a clipboard render, draw based on the onscreen world */
if (situation == DOCREND_copy)
{

GetGWorld( &savedPort, &savedGDev ) ;
this->SetScreenWorld();
if (this->theWindowP != NULL)
SetPort( this->theWindowP ) ;
)

/* determine destination PixMap or BitMap reference */
if (PORT_IS_COLOR( thePort ))
*( (CGrafPtr)thePort)->portPixMap;
destPMPtr
else
(PixMapPtr)&(thePort->portBits);
destPMPtr
/* finally! blast the pixels out! */
/* BWCopyBits() is simply a covering routine to CopyBits() which*/
/* ensures that the current port's pen colors are black and white */
BWCopyBits(
*srcPM, destPMPtr,
&sourceR, &destinationR,
srcCopy, boundsRgn );
if (situation == DOCREND_copy)
SetGWorld( savedPort, savedGDev );
UnlockPixels( srcPM );
return noErr;

..,. Summary

247

GetGWWorld()

This method gives the consumer access to the object's offscreen GWorld.
SetOffGWorld(), SetScreenGWorld()

This makes current the appropriate GWorld. SetOffGWorld() makes
current the offscreen GWorld's port and GDevice; SetScreenGWorld()
makes current the window and its associated GDevice .

.,.. Summary
This chapter established the relationship between Macintosh graphics
and windows. A discussion of the treatment of windows as graphics
entities focused on the windows' regions and their management as
handled by the application and the Window Manager, rendering and
rendering requests, and window-based documents and data organization of graphics presentation models. Printing and the interrelationship between user, application, and system software were also briefly
discussed. Finally, the windowing foundation of ArtToy, an example
painting application, was discussed and presented in window object
classes. The paint tools discussed in Chapter 6 will continue building
the ArtToy application with the addition of painting tools. The full
source code for the CWindo and CPixBufWindo() classes can be found
on the optional source code disk.

6

Mouse-Based Graphics

When a user of the ArtToy paint application selects the pencil from the
tool palette, moves the cursor over the content region of the current
document, and presses the mouse button, he or she reasonably expects that the mouse will act like a pencil and draw a line in the
current foreground color wherever the mouse is moved until the
mouse button is released. The user has similar expectations for all of
the tools in the tool palette. Turning a user's mouse into a drawing
tool is what this chapter is about.
We'll continue to employ the ArtToy paint application as the basis
for discussing the topic of mouse-based drawing. Although the applications you write won't use all of the techniques described in this
chapter (the world doesn't need very many more paint applications),
most of your applications will use some of them. And as you'll read in
the sections ahead, mouse-based drawing techniques are not cut and
dried - there is a lot of room for putting your own spin on the basic
techniques to get just the tool your application needs.
We'll also continue to use the object-oriented approach to programming the techniques we discuss. The discussion naturally starts with a
general description of the things that all mouse-based drawing techniques have in common and proceeds to describe the specific differences required by each individual tool. Such a progression from the
general to the specific mirrors the relationship between high-level,
abstract object classes as ancestors to a whole family of specific,
utilitarian objects.

249

250

..,. Chapter 6 Mouse-Based Graphics

The object definitions given here use the Think C language syntax. If
Think C isn't your native tongue, or if you're unfamiliar with the
object-related syntax, don't worry. You'll still be able to read and
understand the sense of what's being defined. And the objects should
translate easily into any other object-oriented language .

..,. The Two Basic Types of Mouse-Based Tools
All of the wonderful things the user can do to a document with a mouse
can be divided into two basic kinds of activities: drawing and selecting.
Drawing tools include the pencil and paintbrush tools as well as the
geometric shapes like rectangles and ovals. Perhaps less-obvious drawing tools are the paint can, spray can, and eraser. All of them add pixel
color to the "canvas" in response to mouse movement.
The selecting tools, on the other hand, let the user designate areas of
the document as the object of some future activity such as deletion,
rotation, or duplication. Like the drawing tools, selecting tools come
in a variety of shapes and actions. And, as you'll see in the sections
that follow, the selecting tools are largely based on the drawing tools .

..,. Sketching
To understand how the selecting tools are related to the drawing tools,
consider the four user actions that are the basis of all ArtToy tools:
point, click, drag, and release. When the cursor is in the document's
content region, the cursor reminds the user what the mouse can do.
The user points the cursor to a place in the window, clicks down the
mouse button, drags the mouse to somewhere else in the window, and
releases the button.
An application should present the user with the appropriate cursor
at all times and respond correctly when the button goes down. Before
the mouse button is pressed (during "pointing") there isn't much toolspecific processing to be done, just basic cursor maintenance. When
the button goes down, the user is activating the tool that the mouse is
understood to represent, whether it's a pencil, a spray can, a lasso, or
whatever.
·
Most of what you do to effect a tool for the user is to watch the mouse
button and do your tool-like thing while the user holds the button
down (the "click" part). If the user is drawing a pencil line (the
"dragging" part), the application repeatedly reads the mouse location
as the mouse moves around on the screen, drawing line after line
connecting successive points until the user lets up on the button.

~

Sketching

251

While the user holds the mouse button down, the application's execution is very narrowly focused - it isn't interested in any other events
until the mouse button is released.
The ToolBox provides two traps for the purpose of waiting for the
mouse button to be let up.
Boolean StillDown( void);
Boolean WaitMouseUp( void ) ;

These traps return TRUE if the mouse button has not been let up
since the last mouseDown event. The WaitMouseUp() trap removes
the mouseUp event from the event queue and is therefore preferred to
the StillDownO trap. Listing 6-1 is a simplified but typical example of
a pencil drawing tool.
Listing 6-1. A WaitMouseUpO loop
/* application-dependent external references */
enum

PencilToolID
1,
RectToolID
2,
MarqueeToolID = 3
} ;

extern short

gCurrentToolID;

void TrackingSomeRoutine(
EventRecord
*curEvent,
curToolindex
short
EventRecord curEvent;
Point curMouse, lastMouse;
if ( (curEvent->what

!=

mouseDown)

I I (gCurrentToolID !=

PencilToolID))
return;
curMouse = curEvent->where;
GlobalToLocal( &curMouse ) ;
lastMouse = curMouse;
MoveTo( curMouse.h, curMouse.v ) ;
while (WaitMouseUp())

252

..,. Chapter 6

Mouse-Based Graphics

GetMouse( &curMouse );
if (!EqualPt( curMouse, lastMouse ))
{

LineTo( curMouse.h, curMouse.v );
lastMouse = curMouse;

The MoveTo() and LineTo() trap calls are what make this code a
pencil drawing tool. Without them the code routine becomes a generic
template for mouse tracking.
The code inside the WaitMouseUp() loop implements the dragging
part of point, click, drag, release - what we'll call sketching. It repeatedly reads the mouse and draws a shape on the screen in response to
the user's mouse movements. The shape that is drawn during sketching depends on the tool being used. ArtToy exploits the fact that
sketching functionality is shared by both selecting and drawing tools.
Consider the pencil drawing tool and the lasso selecting tool. The
pencil drawing tool is used to draw an irregular line while the lasso
selecting tool is used to select an irregular area. Although the end
result is very different, both the lasso selection and the pencil line are
sketched in the same way. What differentiates the lasso and the pencil
is what happens when the button is released. The important thing to
remember is that whether users are drawing or selecting, first they
have to sketch in order to define the area to be drawn or selected.
The same kind of relationship exists between the rectangle drawing
tool and the rectangular marquee selecting tool. Both are sketched by
showing the rectangle defined by the initial "click" point and the
current cursor position. But when the button is released the marquee
leaves running ants around a selected area of the screen while the
rectangle tool leaves a rectangle in the current foreground color and
pen shape.
The heart of every mouse-based tool is its sketching method - the
QuickDraw traps called inside the WaitMouseUpO loop. The selecting
tools use the drawing tools in that they use the same sketching methods to let the user define a shape or area. When the button is released
the selecting tools and the drawing tools go their separate ways.
With the understanding that selection tools are just like drawing
tools until the button is released, let's define the drawing tools first.
After the sketching methods are defined, we'll come back to the
selecting tools to describe their special behavior.

liJI.

~

Sketching

253

What All Mouse-Based Objects Have in Common
The mouse-based tools, drawing and selecting, for ArtToy will require
a good number of different objects and methods, but let's start with
what all of the objects have in common. We need to define the
granddaddy of all mouse-based objects, which contains the instance
variables and methods common to all. The primary ancestor of all of
the objects we'll declare to support mouse-based tools is called
BasicMouseTool. Described in Listing 6-2, BasicMouseTool defines
what all mouse-based drawing objects have in common.
Listing 6-2. BasicMouseTool class definition
/*
**Something a user draws onto the screen.
*/

struct BasicMouseTool

indirect

Rect limitRect;

!* Drawing limits */

void Init( void);
void ObjKill( void ) ;

/* Initialization method */
/* Detypedef struction method */

void SetLimitRect(
Rect *curLimitR ) ;

/* access limiting rectangle */

void GetLimitRect(
Rect *curLimitR ) ;
void Draw(
short transferMode );

/* ••• VIRTUAL ••• */
/*Overridden by subclasses*/

void Sketch(
Point anchorPt ) ;

/* ••• VIRTUAL ••• */
/* Overridden by subclasses */

RgnHandle MakeRgn( void};/* Region made drawing the object*/
};

The only instance variable described for the basic object is a rectangle called limitRect, which defines, in local window coordinates, the
portion of the window in which the object can be drawn. The limitRect
instance variable is accessed by two methods, SetLimitRect() and
GetLimitRect().

254

~

Chapter 6

Mouse-Based Graphics

The definition of the BasicMouseTool class includes two methods
that should be included in every class definition: an Init() method to
initialize a newly created object, and an ObjKill() method to prepare
an existing object for deletion. Both the Init() and ObjKill() methods
perform simple jobs. Init() sets each of the object's instance variables
to known values; it would, for example, set Handles and pointers to
NULL. ObjKill(), on the other hand, gets the object ready for deletion;
it releases memory that the object allocated. [ObjKillO is called just
before an object is deleted to avoid having memory rendered unavailable because they are allocated to a non-existent object.]
The Sketch() and Draw() methods are what give the objects their
personalities. Sketch() handles the user interaction; its code contains
the WaitMouseUp() loop for mouse tracking. The Draw() method
renders the finished object in the current port.
The rules governing all Sketch() methods are the following:
• Use the patXor copy mode for drawing to the screen.
• Track the mouse while the user sketches the design.
• Save a description of the sketched design.
• Leave the screen the way you found it, with no trace of sketching.
The Draw() method uses the description of the sketched object to
render the design in the current port.
The last method, MakeRgn(), creates a region in the shape of the
design.
These are the instance variables (one) and methods inherited by all
of the mouse-based drawing tools that we're going to define. Some
methods, like SetLimitRect() and GetLimitRect(), are well defined in
the basic object and are not overridden (modified) by the other classes.
Other methods, like Sketch() and Draw(), are only "stubs" in the basic
class and require definitions specific to each class you define.
BasicMouseTool is an abstract superclass in that ArtToy never creates an
instance of a BasicMouseTool. Instead, it serves as a foundation on
which the actual tools that ArtToy uses for its mouse-based drawing
can be built.
While still in the realm of the abstract, and before pressing on with
further definitions of the subclasses of objects that constitute ArtToy' s
drawing tools, let's describe the basic algorithm in which ArtToy uses
its drawing tools. [The code in Listing 6-3 takes place in the context of
a mouseDown event in the content region of the front window.]

..,. Sketching

255

Listing 6-3. General drawing tool use algorithm
void PerformUserSketching( void
{

WindowPtr

curFrontWindow;

/* prepare for sketching into the front window */
curFrontWindow = FrontWindow();
if (curFrontWindow == NULL)
RETURN;

SetGWorld( curFrontWindow, GetGDevice() ) ;
/* Create.new drawing object and make it initialize itself */
rnyDrawTool =new( currentToolType );
rnyDrawTool->Init();
/* invoke tool's sketch method, which should allow the user */
/* to sketch to his/her satisfaction */

myDrawTool->SetLimitRect( &(thePort->portRect) );
rnyDrawTool->Sketch();
/* finished sketching, so now render the sketched graphic */
/* into the document's offscreen GWorld */

SetGWorld( frontWindowOffGWorld, NULL);
myDrawTool->Draw();
/* the tool object's job is done, so dispose it */
myDrawTool->ObjKill();
delete( rnyDrawTool ) ;
/* force an update event and let the window's */
/* update event handling routine redraw it */

SetGWorld( curFrontWindow, GetGDevice() ) ;
InvalRect( &(thePort>portRect) );

The drawing tool objects are created, used, and deleted within the
time that the mouse button is pressed and released - they don't exist
between mouseDown events. While the mouse button is down the
drawing tool objects facilitate sketching. After the button is released
the result of the sketching is drawn offscreen.

256

~

Chapter 6

Mouse-Based Graphics

Consider what's not part of the basic tool definition. The tool objects
have no notion of which port they're drawing in. They draw as easily
to the screen as they do offscreen. It's up to code that utilizes the
objects to set the correct drawing environment before invoking their
sketching and drawing methods. Similarly, the drawing objects use
whatever pen characteristics and colors happen to be in force when
they're called (with the exception of the Sketch() method, which works
in patXor mode). Such is the scope of the mouse-based drawing tools.
~

Drawing Tools and Abstract Differentiation
Of all the tools available to the user of ArtToy, it is the drawing tools
that let the user sketch a shape on the screen. Let's look at what
drawing tools have in common and the purposes served by their
differences.
The designs that ArtToy lets the user draw on the screen can be
subdivided into two types: regular and irregular. For the purpose of
building ArtToy, a regular shape is one that can be described by two
points, while an irregular shape is described by a collection of a
variable number of points.

IJll. Regular Shapes
Two points describe a rectangle and there is a family of shapes that
QuickDraw makes available that can be defined in terms of a rectangle. There are framed rectangles, rounded rectangles, and filled
rectangles. These are all shapes that QuickDraw inscribes in a defining
rectangle. See Figure 6-1 for some examples of QuickDraw's rectangular shapes.
Two points can also be used to describe a line segment. And in
ArtToy, a line segment is used in the anchored line drawing tool. The
user clicks on an initial (anchor) point and then clicks on a second
(end) point. ArtToy draws a line between the two points. This drawing shape is familiar to any user of other paint applications.
The rectangular shapes and the anchored line can be described by two
points, that is, two sets of grid coordinates. This fact gives rise to another
abstract class of objects, RegularMouseTool, defined in Listing 6-4.

~

Drawing Tools and Abstract Differentiation

Framed, rounded Rect

Filled Rect

r - - - -·__.:-;.,;;;-. ...- -...-;;.,,;;-~- - - - -

Framed oval

Filled oval

Figure 6-1 . Regular shapes
Listing 6-4. RegularMouseTool class definition
struct RegularMouseTool : BasicMouseTool
{

Point
Point

anchorPt ;
endPt ;

void Sketch(
Point anchorP t
v oid SetAnchorPt(
Point thePt ) ;
Point

/ * The defining points * /

/ * Override for s pecial sketching * /

);
/ * Acces s to defi n ing points * /

GetAnchorPt( vo i d ) ;

void SetEndPt(
Point thePt ) ;
Point
} ;

GetEndPt( void ) ;

257

258

..,. Chapter 6

Mouse-Based Graphics

There is not much new information introduced with the new subclass RegularMouseTool - just two new instance variables to define
the shape on the screen and four methods that provide access to the
defining points. At the next class differentiation, we'll define a new
abstract class to support the family of rectangular shapes used in
ArtToy, and our first terminal class, the AnchoredLineTool.
Rectangular Shapes

As we mentioned in the preceding section, QuickDraw supports a
variety of shapes that are defined by a rectangle. ArtToy drawing
offers the user two such shapes: rectangles and ovals. Both are based
on an abstract subclass of the RegularMouseTool object called
RectMouseTool, which is defined in Listing 6-5.
Listing 6-5. RegularMouseTool class structure
struct RectMouseTool
void Sketch(
Point anchorPt ) ;
void MakeRect(
Rect *resultR ) ;

RegularMouseTool
/* sketch a rectangular shape */

/* makes Rect from anchor and end points *I

} ;

The definition of RectMouseTool doesn't include any new instance
variables; the two points that describe all regular shapes are sufficient.
What is new is the Sketch() method. It is introduced here, in an
abstract superclass, because the same method - literally the same
code - can sketch any rectangular shape.
The RectMouseTool class also needs a method, MakeRect(), that
examines the anchorPt, and endPt instance variables and creates from
them a Rect structure. It assures that the top of the rectangle is above
the bottom and that the left side is to the left of the right side; the
anchor point and the end point don't imply any such relationship
between their respective coordinates.
The Sketch() method records the initial mouse coordinates as the
object's "anchorPt" and then runs in a WaitMouseUp() loop watching
the movement of the mouse. While tracking the mouse, it repeatedly
draws, erases, and redraws the shape being sketched. When the user
releases the mouse button, the Sketch() method records the final
mouse coordinates as the "endPt," thus defining the regular object.
Listing 6-6 shows the code for the RectMouseTool's Sketch() method.

~

Drawing Tools and Abstract Differentiation

259

Listing 6-6. RectMouseTool::Sketch() method
/*
**Sketching a rectangular object.
*/

void RectMouseTool: :Sketch(
Point firstPt )
Point
Boolean

oldMouse, newMouse;
isDrawn;

isDrawn = FALSE;
oldMouse = newMouse = firstPt;
this->SetAnchorPt( firstPt );
while (WaitMouseUp())
{

/* Track the mouse */
GetMouse( &newMouse );
if (!EqualPt( newMouse, oldMouse ) &&
PtinRect( newMouse, &(this->limitRect)

))

if (isDrawn)
this->Draw( srcXor );
/*Erase the old one*/
this->SetEndPt( newMouse );
this->Draw( srcXor );
/*Draw new one*/
oldMouse = newMouse;
isDrawn = TRUE;

/* Erase the last one drawn */
i f (isDrawn)
this->Draw( srcXor ) ;

Notice that the last thing the Sketch() method does is erase whatever
it finally drew. This method handles only the sketching of the rectan-

gular shape. The Sketch() method exploits the fact that a shape drawn
twice in patXor copy mode is effectively drawn and erased. The final
rendering of that shape, which is left to another method, is usually
handled in the following way:
1. Render the shape into the offscreen representation of the document.
2. Invalidate the portion of the window where the shape is to appear. This generates an update event.

260

~

Chapter 6 Mouse-Based Graphics

3. The application "pretends" that it's finished with drawing the
shape. However, it will receive an update event, at which point it
will transfer the offscreen shape into the window. The time between steps 2 and 3 is usually quite short and often imperceptible
to the user.
Notice also that the Sketch() method assumes that it is being called
after the mouse button has been pressed. Its job is to do its thing while
the button is held down. It should be called from mouseDown event
processing.
The RegularScreenObject's Sketch() method is the first place that
you realize direct benefit from using the object-oriented programming
approach. The object's Draw() method is called for all drawing; in
fact, the Draw() method is the only method that contains any QuickDraw calls. The Sketch() method does only its specific job: It handles
the user interaction for sketching a rectangular object. Each specific
rectangular object tool will define its own Draw() method.
With the Sketch() in place, you're ready to define the terminal
rectangular shape drawing objects for use in ArtToy. Listing 6-7
defines the framed rectangle and framed oval shape drawing tools.
Listing 6-7. RectangleTool and OvalTool class definitions
struct RectangleTool

RectMouseTool

{

void Draw ( ·
/* Draws a rectangle in the current port *I
short transf erMode ) ;
};

struct OvalTool

RectMouseTool

void Draw(
/* Draws an oval in the current port */
short transferMode ) ;
} ;

At this point of object differentiation, all we need to distinguish
between the rectangular shape drawing tools is the Draw() method:
That's all that is unique about these objects. Listing 6-8 shows the
Draw() methods themselves. You can see how simple the methods
have become because all they do is encapsulate the QuickDraw traps
that draw the specific shape in the current port. All of the information

..,.

Drawing Tools and Abstract Differentiation

261

they need for the drawing they do is in the two regular shapedefining points (the instance variables of the RegularMouseTool class)
and the copy mode that was sent in by the caller.
Listing 6-8. RectangleTool::Draw() and OvalTool::Draw() methods
I*

** Draw a rectangle in current port.
*I

void RectangleTool::Draw(
short transferMode )
PenState
Rect

savedPen;
targetR;

GetPenState( &savedPen ) ;
PenMode( transferMode ) ;

/* Remember current pen mode */
/* Set caller's pen mode */
/* preference */
this->MakeRect( &targetR ); /*Create Rect from anchorPt, */
I* endPt */
/* Draw the rectangle */
FrameRect( &targetR ) ;
SetPenState( &savedPen ) ;
/* Restore original pen mode */

I*

** Draw an oval in current port.
*/

void OvalTool: :Draw(
short transferMode
PenState
Re ct

savedPen;
targetR;

GetPenState( &savedPen ) ;
PenMode( transferMode );

/* Remember current pen mode */
/* Set caller's pen mode */
/* preference */
this->MakeRect( &targetR ); /*Create Rect from anchorPt, */
/* endPt */
FrameOval( &targetR ) ;
/* Inscribe the oval */
SetPenState( &savedPen ) ;
/* Restore original pen mode */

262

.,.. Chapter 6

Mouse-Based Graphics

You see more similarities than differences between the two methods
in Listing 6-8; they differ only in the substitution of FrameOval() for
FrameRect().

With the rectangular shape-drawing objects fully defined, let's look
at how one of them, RectangleTool, is used by ArtToy.
Using the RectangleTool Object

Once the mouseDown event processing in ArtToy has determined that
the cursor is in the content region of the frontmost document window
and that the current mouse tool is the framed rectangle drawing tool,
it is ready to use the RectangleTool object. It uses a specific version of
the drawing tool use algorithm, which was presented in Listing 6-3. In
this example, offScreenWorld is the front window's offscreen drawing
environment and localMouse is the mouse position converted from
the EventRecord into the front window's local coordinates.
Listing 6-9 revisits the algorithm used in the mouseDown processing routine.
Listing 6-9. MouseDown processing example for rectangle shape
enum
Pencil Tool ID
1,
RectToolID
2,
MarqueeToolID = 3
};

extern short

gCurrentToolID;

extern GWorldPtr GetDocGWorld(
WindowPtr
theWindow ) ;

void HandleMouseDown(
Point
globalMouse
RectangleTool *aDrawTool;
GDHandle
savedGDev;
GrafPtr
savedPort;
WindowPtr
theWindow;
localMouse;
Point
windowPart;
short

~

Drawing Tools and Abstract Differentiation

windowPart = FindWindow( globalMouse, &theWindow ) ;
if (theWindow != FrontWindow())
return;
switch (windowPart)
case inContent:
switch (gCurrentToolID)
case RectToolID:
/* Determine the window's off-screen buffer */
/* •••Note: application-defined routine! */
offScreenWorld = GetDocGWorld( theWindow ) ;
if (offScreenWorld == NULL)
return;
/* Set up for sketching */
GetGWorld( &savedPort, &savedGDev ) ;
SetPort( theWindow );
localMouse = globalMouse;
GlobalToLocal( &localMouse ) ;
/* Create and initialize new drawing object */
aDrawTool = new( RectangleTool ) ;
aDrawTool->Init();

/* Let the user go nuts */
aDrawTool->SetLimitRect(
&(((GrafPtr)theWindow)->portRect) ) ;
aDrawTool->Sketch( localMouse );
/* Render the rectangle off-screen */
SetGWorld( offScreenWorld ) ;
aDrawTool->Draw( srcCopy ) ;

/* Object has done its job: get rid of it */
aDrawTool->ObjKill();
delete( aDrawTool ) ;
/* Force an update for this window */
InvalRect( &( ((GrafPtr)theWindow)->portRect) );
SetGWorld( savedPort, savedGDev ) ;
break;

263

264

~

Chapter 6 Mouse-Based Graphics

default :
break ;

One thing that the code in Listing 6-9 makes apparent is the reason
that the Draw() method accepts a copy mode as an argument. It lets
the same method - the encapsulation of the QuickDraw rendering
calls dedicated to the object's shape - be used for both sketching
(with patXor) and drawing (with patCopy) .
Figure 6-2 is a representation of what happens on the screen during
the sketching activity - while the mouse button is held down. The
user points the cursor at the anchor point and presses the button. With
the button held down, the cursor is dragged along the path to the end
point, where the mouse button is released. Along the way, at every
iteration of the WaitMouseUp() loop in the Sketch() method, one after
another rectangle is drawn in the window. Before each of these intermediate rectangles (represented with dotted lines in Figure 6-2) is
drawn, the preceding one is erased.
When the mouse button is finally released at the end point, the last
of the intermediate rectangles is erased. The final rectangle, defined
by the anchor point and the end point, is drawn into the window's
offscreen GWorld. During update event processing, the offscreen version of the window contents is rendered on the screen.
Note~

The final rendering of the window's contents on the screen is done
during update processing using CopyBits(). RectangleTool class
is not only not used for this purpose, it doesn't exist during update processing because it was deleted immediately after the
sketching process.
It is easy to see how the great similarities among the rectangle-based
drawing tools can be exploited to create different shape-drawing tools
from objects that differ from one another in just one line of code (out
of hundreds) in the Draw() method.
In the next section we'll look at the anchored-line drawing tool,
which differs only slightly from the rectangle-based drawing tools.

~

~

Drawing Tools and Abstract Differentiation

i:::!l~

R Window

AnchorPt

265

-rrr1-1-r1
I I I I
I I I I
I I I
I I
I I
I

I I I
I I I
I I I dragged mouse

Ir
I I I
I I
I

r_-_-_-_-_-_-_

End Pt
'21

n Window

~

i:::!l~

AnchorPt

L . - - - - - - - - f l l EndPt

Figure 6-2. Drawing a rectangle
The Anchored-Line Drawing Tool
If you look at the family tree for the ArtToy drawing classes (Figure 6-3),
you see that the AnchoredLineTool branches off from all of the rectangular shape drawing tools even though it is a "regular" shape - one
defined by two points in the QuickDraw coordinate plane.

266

.., Chapter 6 Mouse-Based Graphics

BasicMouseTool

RegularMouseTool

AnchoredlineTool
RectMouseTool

Rectangle Tool
OvalTool

lrregularMouseTool

FreelineTool
Polygon Tool

SelectionToois

Lasso
Marquee

Figure 6-3. Class family tree

What differentiates the anchored-line tool from the rectangular tools
is its Sketch() method. We could have used the same method as the
RectMouseTool objects, but we want the anchored-line tool to work
slightly differently so that it can be used by the polygon drawing tool,
which is defined later. Whereas the RectMouseTool::Sketch() method
works like "press, drag, and release," we want the anchored line to be
sketched with a "press, release, drag, press, and release." Listing 6-10
defines the AnchoredLineTool.
Listing 6-10. AnchoredlineTool class structure
struct AnchoredLineTool
void Sketch(
Point anchorPt );

RegularMouseTool
/* They get sketched their own way */

void Draw(
/* Draws the line */
short transferMode ) ;
Point GetEndPt( void); /*Returns line's endpoint */
} ;

.,..

Drawing Tools and Abstract Differentiation

267

As we said, the AnchoredLineTool has its own Sketch() method.
And, as with all of the terminal-class drawing tool objects, it has its
own Draw() method, the method that gives the tool its shape. There
are no new instance variables because, like the rectangle-based shapes,
the anchored line can be described by two points.
In order to facilitate the "press, release, drag, press, and release," means
of sketching, you have to make a couple of minor but crucial alterations to the RectMouseTool sketching code, as shown in Listing 6-11.
Listing 6- 11. Anchored-line sketching
I*

**Lets the user sketch an anchored line.
*/

void AnchoredLineTool: :Sketch(
Point anchorPt )
Event Record
Point
Boolean
long

mouseEvent;
newMouse, oldMouse;
isDrawn;
tempLong;

FALSE;
isDrawn
oldMouse = anchorPt;
while (WaitMouseUp() I I
!WaitNextEvent( mDownMask, &mouseEvent, OL, NULL))
/* Track the mouse, while staying within the limit */
GetMouse( &newMouse ) ;
PinRect( &(this->limitRect), newMouse ) ;
tempLong
newMouse = *(Point*)&tempLong;
if (!EqualPt( newMouse, oldMouse ))
{

i f ( isDrawn)

this->Draw( srcXor ) ;
/* Erase previous line */
this->SetEndPt( newMouse ) ; /* Define new line */
/* Draw new line */
this->Draw( srcXor );
oldMouse = newMouse;
isDrawn = TRUE;

/* Erase last line */
i f ( isDrawn)

this->Draw( srcXor ) ;

268

lill> Chapter 6

Mouse-Based Graphics

Two important things are being done to make the way the anchored
line is sketched different from the way the rectangles were sketched.
Notice the logical text that controls the execution of the dragging loop:
while (WaitMouseUp()

I I !GetNextEvent( rnDownMask, &mouseEvent ))

Even after the user lets up on the mouse button, the loop continues
to "drag" the line's end point around the screen until the mouse
button is pressed a second time. It's still a very focused event loop in
that, like the simpler WaitMouseUp() loop, it concentrates on the
actions of the mouse button. But it differs in that it "drags" with the
mouse button up.
The other significant difference is the use of PinRect() to qualify the
candidate point's coordinates to be inside the object's limits. What this
means is that, even though the cursor may be moved outside the limit
rectangle, the point used for sketching will be that point on the
boundary of the limit rectangle that is closest to the mouse.
We could just as easily have chosen to ignore the mouse when it
roams outside the limit rectangle, just as we could have chosen "press,
drag, and release" button control. But this provides an opportunity to
make a point that applies to all of ArtToy's drawing objects: There is
nothing sacred in the way these objects work. Defining them is a
process that involves making a lot of arbitrary design decisions that
can just as easily go a different way. Keep this in mind as you read
these object definitions and methods.
One other subtle side effect results from using the algorithm in
Listing 6-11. The while() condition will terminate the loop if WaitNextEventO returns an event. The event mask that is being sent into
WaitNextEvent() is intended to mask out all events except mouseDown,
which is the only event that we want to terminate the sketching and
define a line. But if the user clicks the mouse on another application's
window, then the application will receive a suspend event in the form
of an app4Evt, rather than the expected mouseDown event. This event
type cannot be masked out. Being suspended while sketching an
anchored line may be something that the caller of the Sketch() method
should take into account.
Figure 6-4 is a representation of what the user sees when an anchored line is being sketched. As the mouse follows the path indicated
by the heavy dotted line, one after another line is drawn and erased as
represented by the lightly drawn dotted lines. When the mouse button

..,..

Drawing Tools and Abstract Differentiation

269

dragged

~!!D~~~~~~~~~~~nJw~i~n~do~w~~~~~~~~~~~~gjl-

mouse
\

,,

.. ..

.. 1- ...- -

... ..... ,

,. . - - -'-~a

I

--,.~

~ - -

I

AnchorPt

/ /// 1 \ '

"'""1''',

/////I\'

,,"'/t11''''
I
I

/If

I

/ II

I

/ / II

\

V

\
\
\

' .. ..

I

I

''

\

I

ff
ff

'

\

I

\
\

I

I I
I I

.

\

I

'

''

''

, , ,'D End Pt

I

\

..

-

LI

I

I

- - - l - - _,_ -

.. ; ' '

R Window

AnchorPt

End Pt

Figure 6-4. Sketching an anchored line
is pressed a second time, the final end point is accepted and the line is
drawn. The code that ArtToy uses during mouseDown processing to
draw an anchored line is the same as that presented in Listing 6-11 for
drawing a rectangle except that, instead of allocating a new
RectMouseTool, it allocates a new AnchoredLineTool. Notice how
PinRect() tracks the mouse along the inside of the document window.
You should realize a couple of things about the objects and classes
we defined for the regular tools. For one thing, any regular shape

270

~

Chapter 6

Mouse-Based Graphics

could be added to the family of tool objects by simply adding a
Draw() method that renders it. Think of an inscribed pentagonal star,
for example, or a bull's-eye of concentric circles. All that makes them
unique is their Draw() methods; the bull's-eye and the star share far
more similarities than they have differences with the rectangle and
oval objects we defined here.
Also realize how the implementation of the regular objects was
made easier by using an object-oriented approach. If we used strictly
procedural programming, we would have ended up passing function
addresses to other functions or else we would have duplicated a lot of
the code that the objects are able to share.
Having described the regular objects, in the next section we'll describe the irregular objects. They're objects that can't be described by
two points. Instead, they are described by a variable number of points
collected by a somewhat different sketching strategy.

.,. Irregular Shapes: Collected Points
Compared to the regular shapes described in the preceding section,
the irregular shapes are messy. Instead of being neatly described by
two points in space like a rectangle, the irregular shapes are collections of points. The number of points is up to the user and it varies
from one instance to another.
The discussion that follows concerns the objects required to give the
user two irregular-shape drawing tools: the free line and the polygon.
Refer to Figure 6-3 to see where the irregular drawing objects fit in the
family tree.
Common Ground: Essential Irregularity

At the heart of both the free-line and the polygon drawing tools is a
data structure that lets ArtToy accumulate points by tracking the
mouse as the user sketches. The basic irregular object, an abstract
superclass that is defined in Listing 6-12, accumulates point values
into a Handle.
The definition in Listing 6-12 provides the basic mechanism that
supports both irregular objects. By adding just two different Sketch()
methods, the free line and the polygon are endowed with their separate personalities.

1111>

Drawing Tools and Abstract Differentiation

271

Listing 6-12. lrregularMouseTool class definition
struct IrregularMouseTool : BasicMouseTool
{

long
Handle

numPoints;
ptBuffHdl;

void Init( void);

/* How many points define this thing */
/* Heap storage for accumulated points */
/*Allocates handle and zeros numPoints */

long GetNumPoints( void);

/* Returns number of points */

Point GetPoint(
long
ptindex );

/* Returns a desired point */

void SetPoint(
long
ptindex,
Point newPt ) ;

/* Changes a point */

OSErr AddPoint(

/* Adds a new point */
/* to accumulation */

Point

newPt ) ;

void Draw(
short transferMode ) ;

/* Connects the dots */

RgnHandle

/*Creates region from*/
/* collected points */

MakeRgn( void);

PolyHandle MakePoly( void ) ;

/* Polygon from accumulation */

void ObjKill( void);

/*Free the point buffer*/

};

The two instance variables necessary for the irregular-shape drawing tools are "numPoints," which is the number of points that were
accumulated during sketching, and "ptBuffHdl," a Handle to the
point buffer in the application heap. Contrast these two descriptive
instance variables with the two Point instance variables used by the
RegularMouseTool definition. In the case of the RegularMouseTool,
you know that, by definition, a regular object can be described with
two points in the document window. But, in the case of the
IrregularMouseTool objects, you can't know ahead of time how many
points it will take to describe the shape that the user sketches in the
window. So all you can do ahead of time is be ready to accumulate the
points in memory and keep track of how many points there are.

272

~

Chapter 6

Mouse-Based Graphics

An object's point buffer is filled by its Sketch() method. In general, a
Sketch() method tracks the mouse; each time it gets a new set of
coordinates, it appends the new point onto the accumulated points
and increments the counter. The Sketch() methods are discussed in
detail in the following sections.
Compared to the regular shaped objects, the IrregularMouseTool
requires a lot of methods for support. We look at them one at a time.
Listing 6-13 shows the initialization method.
Listing 6-13. lrregularMouseTool::lnit() method
void IrregularMouseTool::Init( void
{

/* Perform normal initializations */
inherited::Init();

/* No points in the buffer yet */
/* Reserve an empty handle */

this->numPoints
O;
this->ptBuffHdl = NewHandle( OL ) ;

The IrregularMouseTool declares its own Init() method but notice
the first thing it does: It calls the inherited Init() method to initialize
itself as a BasicMouseTool and then it sets its own instance variables
to known values. This overrides its inherited method, but, because it
invokes the inherited method, it's functionally a supplement to the
old methods. The GetNumPoints() method shown in Listing 6-14 just
returns value of the numPoints instance variable to the caller.
Listing 6-14. lrregularMouseTool GetNumPoints method
long IrregularMouseTool: :GetNumPoints( void )
{

return this->numPoints;

It exists because some ArtToy code will want to know the number of
points in the object and you don't want that code to reference the
instance variable directly. We'll stretch credibility here to make a point
about object-oriented programming. Suppose that in the future, in
order to reduce the size of the object by 4 bytes, you decide that
instead of actually counting the number of points in numPoints, you

~

Drawing Tools and Abstract Differentiation

273

want to calculate it from the size of the Handle. After making the
change and removing the numPoints instance variable from the object,
all of the code in ArtToy that had been referring directly to numPoints
would have to be changed. But the code that got the number of points
in the object by calling the GetNumPoints() method could go right on
making the same call, without knowing or caring that the method had
been changed. This is an example of encapsulation and it's a practice
worth developing into a habit.
The SetPoint() method, shown in Listing 6-15, coerces the point
buffer's Handle to be treated as a reference to an array of Points. It
then uses the indicated point number to subscript the array in order to
get access to the place in the buffer where the desired point is stored.
Note the sense of paranoia exhibited by SetPoint(): Before modifying
memory it makes sure that the point index value makes sense with
respect to the known number of points in the buffer and that the
buffer is really at least as large as the index implies it is.
Listing 6-15. lrregularMouseTool SetPoint() method
void IrregularMouseTool::SetPoint(
long
pt Index,
Point newPt )
if {{ptindex < this->GetNumPoints()) &&
(ptindex >= 0) &&
(GetHandleSize( this->ptBuffHdl
>= (ptindex+l) *
sizeof( Point )) )
/* Retrieve a point from the buffer. */
((Point*) (*this->ptBuffHdl)) [ptindex] = newPt;

Listing 6-16 shows the SetPoint() method in its entirety.
Listing 6-16. lrregularMouseTool AddPoint() method
OSErr IrregularMouseTool: :AddPoint(
Point newPt )
Size
OS Err

newSize;
errStat;

274

~

Chapter 6 Mouse-Based Graphics

errStat = noErr;
this->numPoints += 1;
/* Count the point. */
newSize =
GetHandleSize( this->ptBuffHdl ) +
(this->numPoints * sizeof(Point));
SetHandleSize( this->ptBuffHdl, newSize ) ; /* Room for one */
/* more point. */
errStat = MemErr();
if (errStat == noErr)
this->SetPoint( this->numPoints-1, newPt ) ; /* Remember */
/*coordinates. */
return errStat;

The AddPoint() method is the main reason that the SetPointO method
exists. AddPoint() manages the object's point buffer. When called, it
increments the point counter and resizes the point buffer to make
room for one more point. Then it calls the SetPoint() method to add
the new point to the end of the buffer.
We hope that you're getting a sense of how the methods are being
used to do just one job each. For example, AddPoint() does all of the
memory allocation, and SetPoint() is the only method that changes the
values in the buffer. By keeping the methods simple and focused, they
are more easily used by the object's subclasses as building blocks to
achieve various kinds of functionality. "So when do we draw something?" you might ask. Listing 6-17 presents a method for that, too.
Listing 6-17. lrregularMouseTool::Draw() method
I*
**Connect the dots.
*/

void IrregularMouseTool::Draw(
short transferMode )
PenState
Point
long

savedPen;
curPt;
ptCount, numPts;

GetPenState( &savedPen );
PenMode( transferMode );
curPt = this->GetPoint( 0 );
MoveTo( curPt.h, curPt.v );
numPts = this->GetNumPoints();

/*Get the first point*/

.,..

Drawing Tools and Abstract Differentiation

275

/* draw lines to each point in succession */
for (ptCount=l; ptCount<nurnPts; ptCount++)
{

curPt = this->GetPoint( ptCount ) ; /*Get the point */
LineTo( curPt.h, curPt.v );
/*Draw a line from*/
/* last pt */

SetPenState( &savedPen );

The Draw() method reads points out of the buffer one at a time and
draws lines between them. The lines are drawn into the current port
in the current pen style. The Draw() method lets the caller give it a
pen mode to use so that it can be used both in the Sketch() method,
which tells it to use patXor, and by the ArtToy mouseDown event
handling code, which calls it with patCopy to render the sketched
shaped into an offscreen GWorld.
It might seem odd that two different drawing tools share the same
Draw() method, and that the Draw() method is defined in an abstract
object. It worked out this way because the two objects are fundamentally the same: Both the free-line tool and the polygon tool are drawn
as a series of connected points. What sets them apart is the way the
user defines the points, that is, the Sketch() method. Contrast this with
the way the rectangular objects interacted. They used the same Sketch()
method for user interaction but differentiated themselves in their
Draw() methods.
The ObjKill() method, a standard method inherited by all descendants
of the BasicMouseTool class, is overridden in the IrregularMouseTool
(see Listing 6-18). Like the Init() method, ObjKill() takes an action
peculiar to the irregular objects before invoking the ancestral method.
Listing 6-18. lrregularMouseTool Draw() method
void IrregularMouseTool::ObjKill( void)
{

if (this->ptBuffHdl != NULL )
DisposHandle( this->ptBuffHdl ) ;
inherited: :ObjKill();

The ObjKill() method frees up the point buffer by disposing of the
handle that was allocated in the object's Init() method.

276

IJll>

Chapter 6 Mouse-Based Graphics

The last method defined for IrregularMouseTool exists in anticipation
of the drawing objects being used by selection tools. It is MakeRgn(),
as shown in Listing 6-19. It uses the accumulated points in the drawn
shape to describe an area in the window. MakeRgnO creates a QuickDraw region and returns its RgnHandle. The selection tools, which are
described in a later section, use the shape-drawing objects to let the
user sketch the area of the screen to be selected. Then they use the
drawn shape and convert it to a region.
Listing 6-19. lrregularMouseTool::MakeRgn() method
/*

**Use accumulated points to create a region.
*/

RgnHandle IrregularMouseTool::MakeRgn( void)
{

Rect
Point
PolyHandle
RgnHandle
GWorldPtr
GDHandle
CGraf Ptr
PixMapHandle
OS Err

polyLimitR;
curPenSize;
result Poly;
resultRgn;
sketchingGW;
savedGD;
savedPort;
gwPixels;
errStat;

if (this->GetNumPoints() < 1)
return NULL;
GetGWorld( &savedPort, &savedGD );
curPenSize = savedPort->pnSize;
/* create a polygon of enclosed pixels and get its bounding box *I
/*Note: this presumes that the ::Draw() method*/
/* uses LineTo() calls! */
resultPoly = OpenPoly();
this->Draw( srcCopy );
ClosePoly();
/* correct the bounding box for the pen size */
polyLimitR = (**resultPoly) .polyBBox;
polyLimitR.right += curPenSize.h;
polyLimitR.bottom += curPenSize.v;
/* create a 1-bit GWorld in which to accumulate a pixel image */
errStat = NewGWorld( &sketchingGW, 1,
&polyLimitR, NULL, NULL, (GWorldFlags)O );

~

if ((errStat

!=

Drawing Tools and Abstract Differentiation

noErr)

I I (sketchingGW

277

NULL))

{

KillPoly( resultPoly ) ;
return NULL;
/* prepare for offscreen drawing */
gwPixels = GetGWorldPixMap( sketchingGW ) ;
if (!LockPixels( gwPixels ))
{

KillPoly( resultPoly ) ;
return NULL;
SetGWorld( sketchingGW, NULL ) ;
/* start with a clean pixel image */
/* fill the area described by the enclosed pixels */
/* add the "sketched" pixels */
EraseRect( &polyLimitR );
FillPoly( resultPoly, black);
FrarnePoly( resultPoly ) ;
/* the GWorld's pixel image now describes both the enclosed */
/* and lower-right pixels, so create a region from it */
resultRgn = NewRgn();
errStat = BitMapToRegion( resultRgn, (BitMap*)*gwPixels ) ;
if (errStat != noErr)
{

DisposeRgn( resultRgn );
resultRgn = NULL;
/* clean up */
KillPoly( resultPoly ) ;
DisposeGWorld( sketchingGW ) ;
SetGWorld( savedPort, savedGD ) ;
return resultRgn;

This method makes use of the BitMapToRegion() trap, which generates a region from a 1-bit PixMap or BitMap. This trap is described in
greater detail in Chapter 7.
You recall that the BasicMouseTool also has a MakeRgnO method. It
works very simply by opening a new region, calling the object's
Draw() method, and then closing the region. It turns out that that isn't

278

~

Chapter 6 Mouse-Based Graphics

sufficient for the kind of results we want from the irregularly drawn
selection tools, which are based on the basic drawing tools.
If you were to use the basic method for creating a region, the
resulting region would be drawn inside of the points that were connected to form it. But the IrregularMouseTool's Sketch() method uses
a series of calls to LineTo() to connect the points. You know from
earlier chapters that QuickDraw draws into pixels below and to the
right of the points it's drawing. For a given closed region, if you use
the same LineTo() traps to create a region that you used while sketching, the sketched pixels below and to the right of the region's boundary points would be excluded from the region.
Figure 6-5 is a magnified view of the pixels, points, and grid lines
near the lower-right boundary of a closed region, which was created
by connecting points A, B, and C. The crosshatched area represents
QuickDraw's mathematical definition of the region that would be
created by connecting points A, B, and C with calls to LineTo(); the
gray pixels would define the region's boundary. But the black pixels
are the ones that the user saw while sketching, which was also done
by calling of LineTo(). This creates a problem: In the interest of WYSIWYG and consistency, you don't want to let the user sketch a line only
to have the visible line excluded from the resulting region. This problem can be solved by creating a region that includes the pixels enclosed in the sketch, drawing that region in an offscreen pixel image,
and then duplicating the sketched LineTo() calls into the same pixel
image. After the region and the sketch lines are combined in an
offscreen pixel image, that pixel image can be used to create a region
(BitMapToRgn()) that contains both the enclosed and visibly sketched
pixels.

FramePoly()
or
4 LineTo()

8

FrameRgnll

Figure 6-5. Making a rgn with FramePoly() versus LineTo()

Listing 6-19, ArtToy's MakeRgn() method, shows how ArtToy solves
the problem. It first creates an offscreen GWorld with a pixel depth of
one bit; the PixMap associated with the offscreen GWorld is essentially a BitMap. Next it creates a region that includes the enclosed

..,.

Drawing Tools and Abstract Differentiation

279

pixels by calling its Draw() method between calls to OpenRgnO and
CloseRgnO. The region is then used to color pixels in the offscreen
GWorld (FillRgn()). After the region's pixels are in the GWorld the
Draw() method is called again. This effectively duplicates the user's
sketching and colors the pixels that were sketched but lay outside of
the defined region. When the offscreen GWorld contains both the
region and the sketched pixels its PixMap is used to create a region by
calling BitMapToRgn(). The output of BitMapToRgn() is sent back to
the caller after the temporary GWorld is disposed of. It's the calling
routine's responsibility to properly dispose of the returned region. As
you'll see in subsequent sections, the "caller" of the MakeRgn() meth-.
ods is a selection object, which keeps the region as one of its instance
variables and disposes of it when its version of ObjKill() is called;
therefore, the threat of regions being left around and unaccounted for
is mitigated by the encapsulation properties of the selection objects.
By the way, the problem solved by using multiple regions for the
irregular shapes doesn't occur with the rectangular shapes. Their Draw()
methods use the framing traps FrameRect() and FrameOval(), which
draw inside of the resulting region so their WYSIWYG-ness is intact.
Free-Line Drawing

Having defined the abstract class IrregularMouseTool, using it to
define a free-line drawing tool is relatively simple. As the definition in
Listing 6-20 shows, creating a free-line drawing tool out of the
IrregularMouseTool just requires a sketching method.
Listing 6-20. FreelineTool class structure
struct FreeLineTool : IrregularMouseTool
OSErr Sketch(
Point startPt,
short copyMode ) ;
};

Listing 6-21 is the listing for the FreeLineTool's Sketch() method.
Listing 6-21. FreellneTool::SketchPlusMode() method
void FreeLineTool::SketchPlusMode(
Point
startPt,
copyMode )
short

280

IJJJ>

Chapter 6 Mouse-Based Graphics

PenState savedPen;
Point
newMouse, oldMouse;
GetPenState( &savedPen } ;
PenMode( srcXor } ;
oldMouse = startPt;
this->AddPoint( startPt } ;
MoveTo( startPt.h, startPt.v } ;
while (WaitMouseUp(}}
{

GetMouse( &newMouse };
if (!EqualPt( newMouse, oldMouse } &&
PtinRect( newMouse, &(thiS->limitRect} }}
LineTo( newMouse.h, newMouse.v };
this->AddPoint( newMouse } ;
oldMouse = newMouse;

this->Draw( srcXor } ; /* Erase sketch marks */
SetPenState( &savedPen ) ;

Listing 6-21 adds one new twist that the previous Sketch() methods
didn;t need: The caller sends a "transferMode" argument to it. Unlike
the regular shape drawing tools, the SketchPlusMode() method used
by the irregular shapes doesn't use the "draw-erase-redraw-erase"
strategy of sketching. Instead, it follows the mouse around the screen,
drawing all the time. As we mentioned while describing the
IrregularMouseTool, the irregular-shape drawing tools are used both
for drawing on the screen and as a way for the selection tools to
describe an area in the document window.
When used for drawing, the tool needs to show what has been
drawn, that is, the result of drawing. For this the SketchPlusMode()
method should be using patCopy drawing mode. But when the freeline drawing tool is being used for selection, its SketchPlusMode()
method should show the user where, not what he or she has drawn. In
order to make the sketched line stand out visibly against the background, it should do its drawing in patXor mode. In order to use the
same sketching code for both purposes, let the caller, who knows
what's going on, pass in the desired pen mode.

~

Drawing Tools and Abstract Differentiation

281

You should notice, however, that the free-line SketchPlusMode()
method is basically the same as the sketching method used by the
regular shaped objects: The mouse is tracked to define the shape while
its button is held down.
Polygon Drawing

As with free-line drawing, turning the abstract IrregularMouseTool
object into an irregular polygon drawing tool requires only a new Sketch()
method. The irregular polygon sketching method is unique in two
ways. First, the sketching loop terminates not when the mouse button
is released but when the polygon in the window is "closed." Second,
the polygon sketching method uses another object, AnchoredLineTool,
to do part of its sketching. Listing 6-22 is the definition of the
PolygonTool class.
Listing 6-22. PolygonTool class structure
struct PolygonTool

IrregularMouseTool

{

void Sketch(
/* Lets user sketch a polygon. */
Point
startPt ) ;
} ;

To the user, polygon sketching works by clicking on a starting point
in the document window. From the starting point the mouse operates
just as if the user were sketching an anchored line: A line anchored at
the starting point follows the mouse until the user clicks the mouse
button a second time. From the second point, a second anchored line
is started that is terminated by a second mouse click. The process
continues - the user draws one after another anchored line - until
the polygon is closed. Figure 6-6 represents sketching an irregular
polygon defined by six points.
Although we've mentioned the term "closed," we've been intentionally vague about just what it means. Closure occurs when the user has
described an enclosed area, but how the user does that is up to the
application. There are a number of equally good ways to let the user
close a polygon; choosing the best one depends on the type of drawing called for. You could watch the line segments to see if one crosses
another and consider that to be closure, or you could say that any
mouse click outside of the window indicates closure. Double-click
could be used as an indicator of closure. The list is long and there is
no clear choice. In fact, more than one could be combined. The method
we've chosen for closure is what we call the "close enough" method.

282

~

Chapter 6

Mouse-Based Graphics

R Window

lastPt

Figure 6-6. Sketching irregular polygon

The "close enough" method essentially says that the polygon being
sketched is considered closed when the user clicks on the starting
point a second time. But clicking on the point a second time is a lot to
ask of the user, so we say that if the user gets within five pixels of the
starting point, that's "close enough."
The example in Figure 6-6 shows the sixth point, labeled lastPt,
which is close enough to the starting point. When the user clicked on
the last point, the sketching software found it to be within the close
enough distance and, instead of using the coordinates of the last point
to draw the line (the dotted line), the software used the coordinates of
the starting point for the ending point of the last line and terminated
sketching. Listing 6-23 is the PolygonTool's Sketch() method.
Listing 6-23 . PolygonTool :: Sketch() method
/*

**Allow user to sketch a pol ygon .
*/

void Po l ygonToo l: : Sketch(
Point startPt )
AnchoredLineTool
RgnHandle
Rect

*curLineSeg ; / *We ' ll need help sketching* /
threshRgn ;
closeEnoughR;

liJJ>

Point
long
short

Drawing Tools and Abstract Differentiation

newPt;
pointsCount;
thresh;

/* Define "close enough" and create a region */
/* for testing for closeness to starting point */
thresh = 5;
SetRect(
&closeEnoughR,
startPt.h - thresh, startPt.v - thresh,
startPt.h + thresh, startPt.v + thresh ) ;
threshRgn = NewRgn();
OpenRgn();
FrameOval( &closeEnoughR );
CloseRgn( threshRgn ) ;
/* Allocate a new anchored line */
curLineSeg =new( AnchoredLineTool );
newPt = startPt;
this->AddPoint( newPt ) ;
do
{

curLineSeg->Init();
curLineSeg->Sketch( newPt );
curLineSeg->Draw( srcXor );

/* User draws a line */
I* Draw link in */
/* disappearing ink */

newPt = curLineSeg->GetEndPt();
this->AddPoint( newPt ) ;
/*Accumulate points */
while (!PtinRgn( newPt, threshRgn));
/* dispose local data allocations */
curLineSeg->ObjKill();
delete( curLineSeg ) ;
DisposeRgn( threshRgn ) ;
/* Erase the last sketch */
this->Draw( srcXor ) ;
/* Make last point equal to start point */
pointsCount = this->GetNumPoints();
this->SetPoint( pointsCount-1, startPt ) ;

283

284

.,.. Chapter 6

Mouse-Based Graphics

There are a few things to notice in the implementation of the Sketch()
method. The area of the screen that is considered close enough to
cause closure is described by a QuickDraw region. The region is
constructed by inscribing an oval in a 10-by-10-pixel box centered on
the starting point. Every new mouse point added to the polygon is
used to test for closure before the loop reiterates.
During every iteration of the loop, a new AnchoredLineTool is
created. This object is used to control the sketching of one line segment (the definition of a new vertex). The AnchoredLineTool is destroyed after it sketches a line whose end point is added to the
accumulating vertex points.
After closure has been achieved, the last point, the one that closed the
polygon, gets changed. Its value is reset to be that of the starting point so
that when the polygon is drawn with the IrregularMouseTool::Draw()
method, true closure occurs .

..,. Selection Tools
Along with drawing, the other interesting thing the user can do with
an ArtToy mouse tool is to select an area in the document window. We
call this process selection. The idea is that the user sketches an area of
the screen in the same way that he or she might sketch with one of the
drawing tools. The sketched area becomes highlighted with an animated boundary and it can then be cut, copied, or otherwise manipulated. The rest of this chapter deals with selection and the tools and
techniques selection requires.
We'll discuss two selection tools in detail: the lasso selection tool
and the rectangular marquee (or just marquee). They are both derived
from the BasicMouseTool class by way of an abstract object that
includes what all selection tools have in common. The common ancestor
for the selection tools is the abstract superclass SelectionTool, which is
defined in Listing 6-24. We'll describe some of the simple methods
now, but the DragRgnO method and the methods for animating the
selection will mean more after we describe the specific selection tools.
Listing 6-24. SelectionTool class definition
struct SelectionTool : BasicMouseTool
RgnHandle
GWorldPtr
short

theRgn;
/* Selected area *I
rgnCopy;
/* Off-screen copy of selected area */
currPattlndex;
/* index of current animating */
/* pattern */

.,..

short
short

Drawing Tools and Abstract Differentiation

pattCount;
pattResID;

285

/* How many patterns are used */
/* Recource ID of animating patterns */

void !nit( void ) ;

/* Initialization */

Boolean DragRgnOutline(
Point*
GWorldPtr

/* Facilitate mouse drag of */
/* outline */
startPt,
/* Initial mouse location */
windDataGW ) ; /* Offscreen window pixel buffer */

Boolean DragRgnPixels(
Point*
GWorldPtr

/* Facilitate mouse drag of */
/* PixMap */
startPt,
/* Initial mouse location */
windDataGW ) ; /* Offscreen window pixel buffer */

Boolean PtinSelection(
Point thePt ) ;

/* Tests point in selected area */

Boolean SelectionEmpty( void);

/*Tests for empty*/
/* selection area */

void AnimateSelection( void);

/*Run ants around*/
/* selected area */

void Frameselection(
Pattern thePatt,
short
transferMode ) ;

/* Draw ants */

void RemoveAnimation( void ) ;

/* Remove ants */

void ObjKill( void);

/* Destroy the selection */

};

All selection objects need the three instance variables in Listing 6-24.
The theRgn instance varial?le is a QuickDraw region. It holds the
definition of the selected area of the window. The rgnCopy variable
points to an offscreen buffer to hold a copy of the pixels in the selected
region. It can be used for pixel-based manipulations such as dragging,
rotating, and filtering. The last of the instance variables, currPattlndex,
tells the object which of the region boundary animation patterns is
currently used on the screen.
The Init() method, shown in Listing 6-25, sets the instance variables
to a known state after first calling the inherited method.

286

~

Chapter 6

Mouse-Based Graphics

Listing 6-25. SelectionTool::lnitO method
I*

**Basic initialization.
*/

void SelectionTool::Init( void)
{

inherited: :Init();
theRgn = NULL;
rgnCopy = NULL;
currPattindex = (-1);

The PtlnSelection() and SelectionEmptyO methods both perform
simple Boolean tests. They are shown in Listing 6-26.
Listing 6-26. SelectionEmpty() and PtlnSelection() methods
/*

**Tests for an empty selection.
*/

Boolean SelectionTool: :SelectionEmpty( void )
{

if (this->theRgn
NULL)
return FALSE;
else
return EmptyRgn( this->theRgn ) ;
/*

**Tests a point for membership in the selection.
*/

Boolean SelectionTool::PtinSelection( Point thePt
if (this->SelectionEmpty())
return FALSE;
else
return PtinRgn( thePt, this->theRgn ) ;

A Rectangular Marquee

The rectangular marquee lets the user sketch a rectangle that is then used
to define a rectangular region in the document window. It's pretty
simple to turn the abstract SelectionTool object into a marquee selection
tool. The definition of the marquee object is shown in Listing 6-27.

liJJ>

Drawing Tools and Abstract Differentiation

287

Listing 6-27. MarqueeSelection class definition
/*
**Rectangular selection tool.
*/

struct MarqueeSelection : SelectionTool
{

void Sketch (
Point startPt );
};

All that is required to create the MarqueeSelection object is to add a
Sketch() method to the SelectionObject. The Selection() method is
shown in Listing 6-28.
Listing 6-28. MarqueeSelection::Sketch() method
void MarqueeSelection: :Sketch(
Point startPt )
RectMouseTool *rectSketcher;
rectSketcher = new( RectMouseTool ) ;
rectSketcher->Init();
rectSketcher->Sketch( startPt );
this->theRgn = rectSketcher->MakeRgn();
rectSketcher->ObjKill();
delete( rectSketcher ) ;

The Sketch() method creates a rectangle drawing tool, calls the
rectangle tool's Sketch() method, and then has the rectangle tool create
a region from its rectangle. And, voila, a rectangular region is defined.
Notice that the region is saved in the theRgn instance variable before
the rectangle drawing tool object is disposed of.
Creating a marquee selection tool from the basic selection tool object
was pretty straightforward. All selection objects are basically the same:
They use a drawing object to let the user sketch a shape that is then
used to define a region.

288

.,.. Chapter 6 Mouse-Based Graphics

The Lasso

Like the MarqueeSelection object, the LassoSelection object is based
on a predefined drawing tool, the free line. But there's a kink or two
added to the lasso.
Everyone has used the lasso in MacPaint. You sketch a free line on
the screen and the resulting selection is composed of all of the black
pixels inside the lasso. It was a great idea; variations on it can be
found in most graphic design and paint programs.
The way the lasso works in a black-and-white environment is easily
understood. But how a lasso should work in a color environment is
less clear. Let's briefly look at how the monochrome lasso works and
then discuss some issues that arise when we take the lasso to go after
a horse of a different color. We'll end up defining a lasso object that
ArtToy can live with.
A Monochrome Lasso. Figure 6-7 represents a lasso sketched in a
monochrome environment. The sketch is made up of eight connected
points labeled A through H. When the user sketches the lasso in
Figure 6-7 and then releases the mouse button, the lasso is constricted
to select the crosshatched area shown in Figure 6-8.
R Window

c

A

D
G

'I

E

Figure 6-7. Black-and-white lasso sketch

..,..

Drawing Tools and Abstract Differentiation

289

n Window

A,--~---_C
\;;; [ F} '--,/
G
E
Figure 6-8. Constricted black-and-white lasso

The mechanism for constricting the lasso is a QuickDraw trap, SeedFill().
Given a starting point, SeedFill() returns a BitMap that represents
where "paint could flow" in the image from the starting point. (A
much simpler use of SeedFill() is shown in the paint bucket tool.) But
consider Figure 6-8. The way to create the crosshatched region from
the sketched region is to subtract from the sketched region the regions
created by using SeedFill() (spilling paint) at each of the points in the
sketch. It's pretty straightforward because paint spilled at the points
in the black areas of the screen result in empty regions. But what
happens when there are more than two colors to consider? Does paint
flow as easily through red as it does through white? Is black the only
color that can stop the spill? What color is the paint?
Lassoing Deep Pixels. The answers to the questions in the preceding
section are elusive - there is no clear right way to handle the situation. To implement the lasso the developer must make an essentially
arbitrary decision.
Figure 6-9 is the same sketched lasso outline as in Figure 6-7, but
now it is lassoing color pixels.

290

~

Chapter 6 Mouse-Based Graphics

R Window

c

A

r

H

D
....

G

,
E

Figure 6-9. Color lasso sketch
Color QuickDraw provides an upgraded tool for tracking spilled paint:
void SeedCFill (
BitMap
*srcBits,
BitMap
*dstBits ,
Re ct
*srcRect ,
Re ct
*dstRect ,
short
seedH,
short
seedV ,
ProcPtr matchProc,
long
matchData ) ;

The first argument is the PixMap into which the paint is spilled. The
second argument is a BitMap; SeedCFill() places a 1 in the bits that
correspond to where the paint leaked. The BitMap is intended to be
used as a mask in other operations. The rectangles let you restrict and
target the spill. The seed values define the origin of the spill. The
paint can leak to any adjacent pixel of the same RGB value as the pixel
at the seed point. The last two arguments allow for customizing how
SeedCFill() decides on where the paint can leak.
To perform a constricting algorithm, start with the whole region
inside the sketch, which you get from the free-line sketching tool that
you used to define the region. After constricting the lasso, you want to
end up with the areas labeled 2, 4, and 6 in Figure 6-10.

..,. Drawing Tools and Abstract Differentiation

291

R Window

H

D

Figure 6-10. Constricted color lasso
Explore what happens as you go constricting from point to point
around the sketch. Call SeedCFill() using the pixel value at point A as
the seed RGB value. The resulting BitMap corresponds to the area
labeled 1 in Figure 6-10. Convert the BitMap to a region and call it
region 1. Subtract region 1 from the whole.
The next point is B. If you call SeedCFill() using point B, then after
calling BitMapToRgn() to get a usable masking region, you have the
region labeled 2 in Figure 6-10. But region 2 is to be left as part of the
result. What's the difference between point 1 and point 2 that makes
you skip point 2 while constricting? How you evaluate each candidate
point depends on how you want the constricting to work.
Here's where the decisions have to be made. For your purposes,
what distinguishes point A from point B is that the pixel at A is the
background color of your drawing. But you could easily have chosen
to accept A and reject B because A is the starting point of the user ' s
sketch. The user thought A was special and told you so by clicking on
it to start the sketch.
There are more variations on constricting that produce different
effects than the one you chose. You could sample the pixel at A and
determine a range of RGB values that are "leaky" with respect to your
"paint." Then you could send SeedCFill() a special "matchProc" argument that looks, not for an exact match, but for pixels falling within
the range of colors.

292

..,_ Chapter 6 Mouse-Based Graphics

ArtToy's lasso constriction rule is to sample the pixel at the candidate point's location. If the pixel's RGB value is the same as the
window's current background color, then use SeedCFillO at that point
and subtract the resulting region from the whole.
ArtToy's Lasso. Listing 6-29 shows ArtToy' s LassoSelection class. It
contains two methods: an override of the ancestral Sketch() method
and a special Constrict() method to create the desired region.
Listing 6-29. LassoSelection class structure
struct LassoSelection : SelectionObject
FreeLine

*theLine;

void Sketch(
Point startPt ) ;
void Constrict( void);
} ;

The Sketch() method is shown in Listing 6-30.
Listing 6-30. LassoSelection Sketch() method
void LassoSelection: :Sketch(
Point startPt )
long nurnPts;
this->theLine =new( FreeLine );
this->theLine->Init();
this->theLine->SketchPlusMode( startPt, srcXor ) ;
nurnPts = this->theLine->GetNurnPoints();
this->theLine->SetPoint( nurnPts-1, startPt );
this->Constrict();
this->theLine->ObjKill();
delete( this->theLine );

The Sketch() method creates a free-line drawing tool and then uses it
for sketching. Notice that the sketching is done in patXor mode so that

~

Drawing Tools and Abstract Differentiation

293

all of the points being sketched will show up in the window. After the
user is done sketching, the final point in the sketch is set to be equal to
the first point so that the shape represents a closed form. Before
discarding the drawing tool, the lasso uses the accumulated points
held in the drawing to constrict the shape. Listing 6-31 is the lasso's
Constrict() method.
Listing 6-31 . LassoSelection:: Constrict() method
void LassoSelection::Constrict( void
{

RGBColor
RgnHandle
GWorldPtr
CGraf Ptr
GDHandle
PixMapHandle
Re ct
Point
OS Err
long

targetRGB, curRGB;
fillingRgn;
rgnBitsWorld;
savedPort;
savedGDev;
currentPM, rgnPM;
fillingBoundsR;
curPt;
errStat;
pt Index, totalPts;

/* Create the starting region */
this->theRgn = this->theLine->MakeRgn();
if ((this->theRgn ==NULL) I I ErnptyRgn( this->theRgn))
return;

GetGWorld( &savedPort, &savedGDev );
currentPM = savedPort->portPixMap;
errStat =
NewGWorld(
&rgnBitsWorld, 1, &(savedPort->portRect),
NULL, NULL, OL ) ;
if (errStat != noErr)
{

DisposRgn( this->theRgn );
this->theRgn = NULL;
return;

/* set up for point by point exclusion */
SetGWorld( rgnBitsWorld, NULL);
rgnPM = GetGWorldPixMap( rgnBitsWorld );
(void)LockPixels( rgnPM ) ;

294

~

Chapter 6

Mouse-Based Graphics

totalPts = this->theLine->GetNumPoints();
RGBBackColor( &targetRGB ) ;
for (ptindex=O; ptindex<totalPts; ptindex++)
{

/* Bypass redundant pixels */
curPt = this->theLine->GetPoint( ptindex ) ;
if (PtinRgn( curPt, this->theRgn ))
{

GetCPixel( curPt.h, curPt.v, &curRGB ) ;
if ((curRGB.red == targetRGB.red) &&
(curRGB.green == targetRGB.green) &&
(curRGB.blue == targetRGB.blue))
fillBoundsR = (**(this->theRgn)) .rgnBBox;
SeedCFill (
(BitMap*)*currentPM, (BitMap*)*rgnPM,
&f illBoundsR, &fillBoundsR,
curPt.h, curPt.v, NULL, 0 ) ;
fillingRgn = NewRgn();
errStat = BitMapToRegion( fillingRgn, (BitMap*)*rgnPM );
if ( (errStat == noErr) && !EmptyRgn( fillingRgn ) )
DiffRgn( this->theRgn, fillingRgn, this->theRgn ) ;
DisposeRgn( fillingRgn ) ;

DisposeGWorld( rgnBitsWorld ) ;
SetGWorld( savedPort, savedGDev );

The SeedCFill() trap isn't fast and there can be a lot of points in a
lasso sketch, so we added a shortcut to the algorithm to speed it up.
Before retrieving a pixel's RGB value and testing it against the target
RGB value, the algorithm checks to see whether or not the candidate
point is in the remaining region, which is getting nibbled away by
successive fills and subtractions. All of the original points are in the
region, but picture what would happen if there were a point A 1/2 on
the boundary in the white area between A and B. After the constriction is performed on point A and region 1 is removed from the whole,
constricting at point A 1/2 would be redundant, so you do the relatively
quick PtlnRgnO test, skip it, and move on.

.,..

Drawing Tools and Abstract Differentiation

295

Showing the Region: Running Ants
Once the user has selected a region in the document window, it's
important to show the region. After all, the user selected the region for
a reason. He or she is going to use it as the object of some kind of
action in the near future - it might be cut or copied, or it might be
moved to a different part of the window. The accepted way to show
the user the selected region is to frame it with a moving dotted
outline, sometimes referred to as running ants because ... well, it just is,
even though the effect doesn't look anything like running ants to us.
The basic idea in implementing running ants is that a line drawn
with a nonsolid pattern in place comes out looking like a dotted line.
And if subsequent lines drawn in the same place on the screen are
drawn with two patterns that are similar but just lightly offset, the
dots (or "ants") in the first line appear to have shifted to a new
position in the second line. By repeatedly redrawing a line with a
series of offset patterns, and if the last pattern in the series makes a
smooth transition back to the first, the dotted line seems to run like
the lights on a theater marquee.
A QuickDraw bit pattern is composed of 64 bits that are logically
considered to form an 8-by-8-pixel design. If you want the ants to
move by 1 bit for each shift (redraw), eight different patterns are
required. The eight patterns are shown in Figure 6-11. The series of

First Pattern

Second Pattern

Third Pattern

Fourth Pattern

Fifth Pattern

Sixth Pattern

Seventh Pattern

Eighth Pattern

Figure 6- 11. Ant patterns

296

..,. Chapter 6

Mouse-Based Graphics

patterns progresses as the labels under the patterns indicate, from first
to eighth. The "line" on which the ants run is drawn in the current
port by the selection object's FrameSelection() method, which is shown
in Listing 6-32.
Listing 6-32. SelectionTool::FrameSelection() method
void SelectionTool: :FrameSelection(
Pattern thePatt,
short
copyMode
PenState savedPen;
if (this->SelectionEmpty())
return;
GetPenState( &savedPen );
PenPat( thePatt ) ;
PenMode( copyMode ) ;
FrameRgn( this->theRgn ) ;
SetPenState( &savedPen ) ;

Notice in Listing 6-32 that the FrameSelection() method accepts a
pattern and a copy mode as parameters. Its job is pretty straightforward: It frames the selection region in the desired pen mode with the
desired pattern.
ArtToy keeps the ant patterns in its resource fork. Repeatedly stepping through the patterns, framing the selection region with one after
another of the patterns, creates an effect of ants running from the
upper left to the lower right.
Getting the running ants to work properly requires a couple of
tricks, which are performed in the SelectionTool's AnimateSelection()
method, as shown in Listing 6-33.
Listing 6-33. AnimateSelection() method
/*
**Run ants around selection.
*/

void SelectionTool::AnimateSelection( void)
Handle
Pattern
short

resHandle;
curPatt, resultPatt;
pattResID, i;

..,.

Drawing Tools and Abstract Differentiation

297

if (this->SelectionEmpty())
return;
if (this->currPattindex < 1)
{

/* first time, use starting pattern */
this->currPattindex = 1;
resHandle = (Handle)GetResource( 'PAT '
if (resHandle != NULL)

pattResID );

{

this->pattCount = *(short*) (*resHandle);
GetindPattern( curPatt, pattResID, 1 ) ;
this->FrameSelection( curPatt, srcCopy ) ;
return;

/* retrieve current patterns */
GetindPattern( curPatt, this->pattResID, this->currPattindex ) ;
/* bump index and retrieve next pattern */
this->currPattindex++;
if (this->currPattindex >= this->pattCount)
this->currPattindex = 1;
GetindPattern( resultPatt, this->pattResID,
this->currPattindex );
/* combine current and next patterns: */
/* byte by byte, create a difference pattern */
for (i=O; i<sizeof(Pattern); i++)
(((char*)resultPatt) [i]) =
( ( (char*)curPatt)) [i] " ( ( (char*)resultPatt)) [i];
/* frame selection with the calculated difference pattern */
this->FrameSelection( resultPatt, srcXor ) ;

The first time we frame the selection we want to use the first of our
patterns and write them in patXor mode. We chose to write the
framing pixels in patXor mode for the sake of appearance and to make
the programming easier. The easier programming comes when we
want the ants to disappear.
As to appearance, if the ants are written in srcCopy mode, one
pattern after another, the animation works, but foreground-colored
ants run on a background-colored track. This is certainly all right in a

298

.,.. Chapter 6 Mouse-Based Graphics

black-and-white world and it might be OK in colored pictures, but we
think the effect is better if the user sees Xor-ed ants running over the
picture's pixels.
Getting the ants to work in patXor mode might at first seem to be
less desirable because, before you can write the next pattern to the
screen, you have to remove the current pattern, which would cause
undesirable flashing. The trick is to write only the first pattern and
then, for subsequent patterns, to write a difference pattern. Figure 6-12
shows two equations for Boolean operations on bit patterns. The first
one is for the creation of a difference pattern. This is done in memory
every time the AnimateSelection() method is called subsequent to the
first time.
The pattern labeled "Current pattern" represents what is on the
screen when the AnimateSelection() method is called. "Next pattern"
is what we want to replace it with. The method retrieves both patterns
from the resource fork and creates a difference pattern as shown in the
top equation of Figure 6-12. The next equation represents what happens when the difference pattern is sent to the FrameSelection() method.
The result on the screen is the desired "Next pattern."
Choosing to write the ants in patXor mode can also make some
programming easier. When the user clicks in a document window in
which there is an animated selection, but clicks outside of the selection, the ants should disappear. If you had been drawing in patCopy

=

XOR
Current Pattern

Next Pattern

• •• •
•• •••
XOR
• ••
•
• •

Result Pattern

r-

•

Current Pattern

Result Pattern

Figure 6-12. Ant pattern logic

=
Next Pattern

..,.

Drawing Tools and Abstract Differentiation

299

mode, the screen contents would have been overwritten by the ants
and their background. The only way to make them go away is to
rewrite the screen in the ant track. Doing so means choosing between
fancy region manipulation to isolate the ant track and the possibility
of over-updating to rewrite the whole region. But because you write
the ants in patXor, you can make them go away by writing them again
in the current pattern. Listing 6-34 shows this being done in the
RemoveAnimation() method.
Listing 6-34. SelectionTool::RemoveAnimationO method
/*

**Remove the ants.
*I

void SelectionTool: :RernoveAnirnation( void )
Pattern

curPatt;

GetindPattern( curPatt, this->pattResID, this->curPattindex );
this->FrarneSelection( curPatt, srcXor );
/* Have to start over */
this->curPattindex = (-1);

For most applications, removing the ants is a good idea when the
window containing the selection goes behind another window; this
could be a result of another of the program's windows being selected
(deactivate event), another application taking over (suspend event), or
a modal dialog coming up in front of the window. In all of these cases,
if the ants were removed in response to the events we mentioned,
resuming the animation would just be a matter of calling the
AnimateSelection() method, which will behave as if it were animating the ants for the first time.
Implementing running ants provides a lot of room for alteration to
suit your needs and your taste. One thing you might consider is a
speed governor. The speed at which QuickDraw can frame a region
varies depending on the complexity of the region. The FrameRgn()
trap is optimized to recognize some special case regions; as a result,
framing a rectangular region happens very quickly compared to other
shapes, maybe too fast for good animation effects.

300

~

Chapter 6 Mouse-Based Graphics

Dragging a Selected Region

When the user points into a selected region in the document window
and clicks the mouse, ArtToy, like most picture-oriented applications,
lets the user drag the selected region around the window. Two kinds
of dragging are available: dragging outlines and dragging PixMaps.
We discuss them both in the next two sections. ArtToy's SelectionTool
object has only one method for dragging the selection, but we'll
present two different versions of it to demonstrate the two different
approaches to dragging regions.
Dragging an Outline. The simplest dragging to implement is to show
the user the outline of the selection while it's in motion (that is, while
the mouse button is held down). The SelectionTool's Drag() method
uses the DragGrayRgnO trap, that does just what its name implies.
long DragGrayRgn(
RgnHandle
rgn,
Point
pt,
Rect
*bounds,
Rect
*slop,
short
axis,
ProcPtr
action ) ;

The first two arguments are the region that is to be dragged and a
point inside the region. The point is typically composed of the mouse
coordinates where the user clicked inside the region.
The "bounds" and "slop" arguments are used to restrict the dragging to certain areas of the screen. (Remember: The mouse won't leave
the visible area of the desktop so you don't have to worry about that.)
The "bounds" argument must lie entirely within the slop rectangle
(they may be the same rectangle). As the user drags the region on the
screen, the point sent in is "pinned" inside the ''bounds" rectangle not the outline region, just the point. Figure 6-13 shows a region with
its bounding rectangle (rgnBBox), a point inside the region, and a
rectangle (dragRect) that will tell DragGrayRgnO to restrict dragging
to keep the entire region in the window.
The "axis" argument can have one of three predefined values:
noConstraint, which means that the region is free to move both horizontally and vertically; hAxisOnly, which means that the region can
only move horizontally; and vAxisOnly, which means vertical movement only.

~

Drawing Tools and Abstract Differentiation

301

n Window

-----~[ ____________________ _
2 :

2

1

I

~-:!..., - ~
'
.. + ',1

11

3 J

I
I

1

~

I

I

'\
I
I

~ - -,..- -

'

~

I

\

J- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

~ -; , I
4

~

-

1
1

/I

\

4

I '
.__ ' -

I
_1

;-'
-

-

.. -

I

1

-

rgnBBox

dragRect

Figure 6-13. Dragging a region
The "actionProc" argument contains a pointer to a routine to be
called repeatedly while the mouse button is held down.
The DragGrayRgn() trap returns the new coordinates of a point
where the user dropped the region by letting up on the mouse button.
The coordinates are stored in the 32-bit return code with the highorder 16 bits holding the vertical value and the low-order 16 bits
holding the horizontal value. If the mouse was let up outside the
"slop" rectangle, the return value is $80008000 hexadecimal.
Dragging the thumb in a vertical scroll bar is controlled by a call to
DragGrayRgn() and is a perfect illustration of how this trap works.
When you click in the thumb box, its outline becomes a gray region.
As the mouse is moved, the thumb's outline tracks up and down in
the scrollbar; the axis argument value is vAxisOnly. The mouse doesn't
have to be inside the thumb while dragging, but if it gets too far away
the thumb is dropped and the outline region disappears. This is the
function of the "slop" argument: It provides a bit of tolerance so that
the mouse location merely has to be close to the screen object, and not
completely inside. When the mouse leaves the "slop" area, then the
dragging is suspended until the mouse re-enters the "slop" area or the
button is released.
One important thing about using DragGrayRgnO is that, before
making the call, you should calculate and remember your point's
offset from the region's bounding rectangle. You can think of the offset
as local coordinates within the region's bounding rectangle. When

302

~

Chapter 6 Mouse-Based Graphics

DragGrayRgn() returns new, valid mouse coordinates, the application
will need to render the object on the screen in the new location. As
most drawing is rectangle-based, at that point you must calculate a new
offset value back into where the object should be drawn. Remember
also that if the object needs to disappear, either before or after dragging, it's the application's responsibility to pull off the vanishing act.
Listing 6-35 shows the DragRgnOutline() method, and how it uses
DragGrayRgn().
Listing 6-35. SelectionTool::DragRgnOutline ()method (gray outline)
/*

**Facilitate mouse-based dragging
*I

Boolean SelectionTool: :DragRgnOutline(
startPt,
Point*
GWorldPtr windowGW )
Rect
Point
PixMapHandle
CGrafPtr
GWorldPtr
GDHandle
OS Err
long
short
Boolean

rgnBoundsR, offBoundsR, dragLimitR, slopLimitR;
draggedToPt;
windowCopyPM, off screenPM, windowPM;
savedPort;
windowCopyGW;
savedGDev;
errStat;
newDragValue;
curPixDepth;
didDrag;

/* better safe than real sorry! */
if (this->theRgn == NULL)
return FALSE;
/* determine current graphics environment */
GetGWorld( &savedPort, &savedGDev );
/* determine a dragging limit that keeps the region */
/* entirely within the window during dragging */
rgnBoundsR = (**(this->theRgn)) .rgnBBox;
SetRect(
&dragLimitR,
startPt->h - rgnBoundsR.left,
startPt->v - rgnBoundsR.top,
savedPort->portRect.right - (rgnBoundsR.right - startPt->h),
savedPort->portRect.bottom - (rgnBoundsR.bottom -.startPt->v));

..,,.

Drawing Tools and Abstract Differentiation

303

slopLirnitR = dragLirnitR;
InsetRect( &slopLirnitR, -10, -10 ) ;
/* let the user drag the region around */
newDragValue =
DragGrayRgn(
this->theRgn, *startPt, &dragLirnitR, &slopLirnitR,
noConstraint, NULL ) ;
/* determine if the user performed a valid drag operation */
didDrag = (newDragValue != Ox80008000);
/* perform the move */
if (didDrag)
windowPM = GetGWorldPixMap( windowGW ) ;
if (!LockPixels( windowPM ))
return FALSE;
/* copy the selected pixel values */
curPixDepth = (**windowPM) .pixelDepth;
offBoundsR = rgnBoundsR;
OffsetRect( &offBoundsR, -offBoundsR.left, -offBoundsR.top );
errStat =
NewGWorld(
&windowCopyGW, curPixDepth, &offBoundsR,
NULL, NULL, (GWorldFlags)O ) ;
if (errStat != noErr)
{

DisposeGWorld( windowCopyGW );
UnlockPixels( windowPM ) ;
return FALSE;

windowCopyPM = GetGWorldPixMap( windoWCopyGW ) ;
if (!LockPixels( windowCopyPM ))
{

DisposeGWorld( windowCopyGW ) ;
UnlockPixels( windowPM ) ;
return FALSE;
CopyBits(
(BitMap*)*windowPM, (BitMap*)*windowCopyPM,
&rgnBoundsR, &offBoundsR, srcCopy, this->theRgn ) ;

304

..,. Chapter 6 Mouse-Based Graphics

/* erase pixel values at original location */
EraseRgn( this->theRgn );
/* play a game to type-coerce the drag value into a Point */
/* and move the region to the new dragged location */
draggedToPt = *(Point*)&newDragValue;
OffsetRgn( this->theRgn, draggedToPt.h, draggedToPt.v ) ;
rgnBoundsR = (**(this->theRgn)) .rgnBBox;
/* copy original pixel values into new location */
CopyBits (
(BitMap*)*windowCopyPM, (BitMap*)*windowPM,
&offBoundsR, &rgnBoundsR, srcCopy, this->theRgn ) ;
/* clean up */
UnlockPixels( windowPM );
DisposeGWorld( windowCopyGW ) ;

SetGWorld( savedPort, savedGDev ) ;
return didDrag;

The DragRgnO method, as shown in Listing 6-35, makes a copy of
the pixels under the selection in the window before letting the user
drag the gray outline. After the user has completed dragging,
DragRgnO leaves a hole where the selection originally was and copies
the selected pixels to their new location in the window.
Like the Sketch() methods, the DragRgnO method is part of the
general "point, click, drag, and release" proc~ssing common to all
mouse-based tools. As such, it employs a WaitMouseUp() loop, but
you can't see it in the code because it's in the call to DragGrayRgn().
The next section describes how ArtToy works if its DragRgnO method
actually drags the pixels instead of using DragGrayRgn() to drag an
outline. You'll also see the WaitMouseUp() loop at work.
Dragging the Selected Pixels. Let's change ~he visual effect of the
DragRgnO method. Instead of the user dragging a gray outline of the
region around the window, you can create the effect of actually dragging the pixels. This change requires minor changes to the way the
DragRgn() method was coded in the preceding section. Specifically,
you need to replace the call to DragGrayRgn() and take care of the
WaitMouseUp() processing in the method.

.,..

Drawing Tools and Abstract Differentiation

305

The essence of the change is that instead of offsetting and framing
the region as DragGrayRgnO does in its WaitMouseUp() loop, you
want to call CopyBits() to paint the screen from the temporary GWorld
in which you saved the selected pixels. Listing 6-36 shows the new
version of the DragRgnO method.
Listing 6-36. SelectionTool::DragRgnPixels() method
/*

**Facilitate mouse-based dragging.
*!

Boolean SelectionTool: :DragRgnPixels(
Point*
startPt,
GWorldPtr windowGW )
PixMapHandle
GWorldPtr
GDHandle
RgnHandle
Re ct
Point
short
OSErr

selCopyPM, windowPM;
selCopyGW, savedPort;
savedGDev;
curRgn, newRgn, updateRgn;
sourceR, destR, offWorldR, rgnBoundsR, dragLimitR;
curPt, lastPt;
curPixDepth;
errStat;

/* better safe than real sorry! */
if (this->theRgn
NULL)
return FALSE;
/* determine current graphics environment */
GetGWorld( &savedPort, &savedGDev ) ;
/* allocate an image buffer to hold a copy of the selected pixels */
curPixDepth = (**(savedPort->portPixMap)) .pixelDepth;
offWorldR = (**(this->theRgn)) .rgnBBox;
OffsetRect( &offWorldR, -offWorldR.left, -offWorldR.top ) ;
errStat =
NewGWorld(
&selCopyGW, curPixDepth, &offWorldR,
NULL, NULL, (GWorldFlags)O ) ;
if (errStat != noErr)
return FALSE;
selCopyPM = GetGWorldPixMap( selCopyGW );
i f ( ! LockPixels ( selCopyPM ) )
{

306

..,. Chapter 6

Mouse-Based Graphics

DisposeGWorld( selCopyGW ) ;
return FALSE;
windowPM = GetGWorldPixMap( windowGW ) ;
if ( ! LockPixels ( windowPM ) )
{

DisposeGWorld( selCopyGW );
return FALSE;

/* copy the selected pixels into the new GWorld */
destR = (**(this->theRgn)) .rgnBBox;
SetGWorld( selCopyGW, NULL);
CopyBits(
(BitMap*)*windowPM, (BitMap*)*selCopyPM,
&destR, &offWorldR, srcCopy, this->theRgn ) ;
/* determine a dragging limit that keeps the region */
/* entirely within .the window during dragging */
rgnBoundsR = (**(this->theRgn)) .rgnBBox;
SetRect(
&dragLimitR,
startPt->h - rgnBoundsR.left,
startPt->v - rgnBoundsR.top,
savedPort->portRect.right - (rgnBoundsR.right - startPt->h),
savedPort->portRect.bottom - (rgnBoundsR.bottom - startPt->v) );
curRgn = NewRgn();
newRgn = NewRgn();
updateRgn = NewRgn();
CopyRgn( this->theRgn, curRgn ) ;
/* restore port, hopefully to the target window */
SetGWorld( savedPort, savedGDev ) ;
curPt = *startPt;
while (WaitMouseUp())
{

/* get current mouse location */
GetMouse( &curPt ) ;
i f (!Equal Pt ( curPt, lastPt ) && PtinRect ( curPt, &dragLimitR ) )
{

/* copy and relocate the region to new mouse location */
CopyRgn( curRgn, newRgn ) ;
OffsetRgn( newRgn, curPt.h - lastPt.h, curPt.v - lastpt.v ) ;

~

Drawing Tools and Abstract Differentiation

307

/* determine area to be redrawn */
SectRgn( newRgn, curRgn, updateRgn ) ;
/* update the invalid portion of the window */
/* just uncovered by the move */
sourceR = (**windowPM) .bounds;
destR = savedPort->portRect;
CopyBits(
(BitMap*)*windowPM, (BitMap*)*(savedPort->portPixMap),
&sourceR, &destR, srcCopy, updateRgn );
/* draw the region in the new location within the window*/
sourceR = savedPort->portRect;
destR = (**newRgn) .rgnBBox;
CopyBits(
(BitMap*)*selCopyPM, (BitMap*)*(savedPort->portPixMap),
&sourceR, &destR, srccopy, newRgn ) ;
lastPt

=

curPt;

/* update the window pixel buffer */
SetGWorld( windowGW, NULL ) ;
/* leave a hole and copy selection to new location */
sourceR = (**selCopyPM) .bo.unds;
destR = (**newRgn) .rgnBBox;
EraseRgn( this->theRgn );
CopyBits(
(BitMap*)*selCopyPM, (BitMap*)*windowPM,
&sourceR, &destR, srcCopy, newRgn ) ;
/* move the region */
OffsetRgn( this->theRgn, curPt.h - startPt->h, curPt.v startPt->v ) ;

/* clean up */
UnlockPixels( windowPM ) ;
DisposeRgn( curRgn );
DisposeRgn( newRgn ) ;
DisposeRgn( updateRgn ) ;
DisposeGWorld( selCopyGW ) ;
SetGWorld( savedPort, savedGDev ) ;

return TRUE;

308

~

Chapter 6

Mouse-Based Graphics

Using the Selection Tools

Listing 6-37, which is similar to Listing 6-9, shows how ArtToy uses a
selection tool during mouseDown event processing. Unlike Listing
6-9, this time the current mouse tool is the marquee selection tool and
the user is about to define a rectangular area in the document window.
Listing 6-37. MouseDown processing for marquee selection
SelectionTool *HandleMouseDown(
Point globalMouse }
MarqueeTool
WindowPtr
short
Point

*theDrawTool;
theWindow;
windowPart;
localMouse;

windowPart = FindWindow( globalMouse, &theWindow };
if (theWindow != FrontWindow(}}
return NULL;
switch (windowPart}
{

case inContent:
switch (currentMouseTool}
{

case MarqueeToolID:
SetGWorld( (CGrafPtr}theWindow, GetGDevice(} } ;
/* Create and initialize selection object */
theDrawTool = new( MarqueeSelection } ;
theDrawTool->Init(};
theDrawTool->SetLimitRect(
&(((GrafPtr}theWindow}->portRect} } ;
/* Let user go nuts */
localMouse = globalMouse;
GlobalToLocal( &localMouse } ;
theDrawTool->Sketch( localMouse } ;
if

(!theDrawTo~l->SelectionEmpty(}}

/* return selection object */
return (SelectionTool*}theDrawTool;
else
{

/* Object be gone! */
theDrawTool->ObjKill(};
delete( theDrawTool };

309

break;
default:
break;

return NULL;

Listing 6-37 looks like Listing 6-39 with two important differences in
what happens when the sketching is finished. If the user defined a
nonempty region, then the selection tool is saved. Whereas the drawing tools were disposed of as soon as they were drawn into the
window's offscreen buffer, the selection tool gets saved in a global
variable that can be used to animate the selection and provide access
to the selected region for other routines to process further.
One way that the selection gets accessed is when the user drags it by
pointing into the selected regions and pressing the mouse button.
Listing 6-38 shows how mouseDown event processing in ArtToy goes
when the user clicks inside the selection.
Listing 6-38. Handling a mouseDown event in a selection
void HandleAMouseDown(
Selection
*aSelection
WindowPtr
short

theWindow;
windowPart;

windowPart = FindWindow( globalMouse, &theWindow ) ;
if (theWindow != FrontWindow())
RETURN;
switch (windowPart)
case inContent:
if ((globalSelection !=NULL) &&
globalSelection->PtinSelection( localMouse ))
globalSelection->DragRgn();
break;

310

"" Chapter 6

Mouse-Based Graphics

...,. Summary
This chapter discussed mouse-based drawing. We looked at the way a
paint application, ArtToy, uses the two basic kinds of mouse-based
tools: drawing tools and selecting tools.
Both drawing and selecting tools require a sketching method that
focuses on the mouse while the user is defining the desi.red shape.
Inasmuch as the graphical user interface involves pointing, clicking,
dragging, and releasing, the sketch method takes control after the
click and does its thing until the mouse button is released.
Selection objects, which are based on the drawing objects, let the
user define an area on the screen that can be turned into a QuickDraw
region and manipulated. Defining an area with a lasso selection tool
requires a constricting method based on the SeedCFill() trap.
Once defined, a selected area is highlighted by running ants. When
the user clicks inside the selected area, the selected pixels are dragged
around by the mouse. We also presented two methods of implementing dragging: dragging an outline with DragGrayRgn() and dragging
pixels.
In Chapter 7 we discuss advanced CopyBits() usage and image
processing.

7

Image Processing with
Quick Draw

Photographers have a number of means at their disposal for producing custom images. They can place a special lens on the camera to
warp or distort an image, or they can use special filters during the
printing process to control the color of a print. They can even splice
negatives or film together using special backgrounds to create effects,
such as a boy flying through the air on a bicycle in the movie E.T.
While such optical techniques provide great flexibility, speed, and a
nearly endless variety of output, many methods are complicated and
require expensive, highly specialized equipment. Once an image is
entered into a computer, however, the programmer has complete control of how that image is processed. Rather than requiring specialized
equipment to produce each effect, the programmer simply needs a
routine that performs the desired transformation. And with the computer, anything imaginable is possible.
It's no wonder that many of the special effects produced in Hollywood are either assisted or completely generated by computer. The
Genesis planet-transformation scenes in Star Trek III: The Search for
Spock, Raziel' s transformation sequence in Willow, the hoverboard
sequences in Back to the Future, many of the spiders in Arachnophobia,
various scenes in Ghost, and the water animation in The Abyss are only
a few examples of movies employing computer image processing.
While some sequences are entirely generated by computer, most are
filmed and then processed. Processing such images usually requires a
programmer who creates special tools and an artist who uses those
tools to produce the final image.
311

312

..,. Chapter 7 Image Processing with QuickDraw

While QuickDraw does not have the built-in ability to perform the
highly specialized image processing necessary to produce the kinds of
effects seen in these movies, producing such effects is not beyond the
capability of the Macintosh. Generating such effects involves creating
a GWorld and manipulating its contents.
As far as QuickDraw is concerned, an image is a PixMap or a BitMap.
Aside from the simple maintenance functions performed by the GWorld
traps, CopyBits() and CopyDeepMask() are the workhorses of QuickDraw's image processing. With these traps, you can perform several
standard image-processing operations on a PixMap, such as resizing
(by stretching, shrinking, or clipping the image), colorizing, or masking certain areas. The following sections discuss how to perform these
operations.
This chapter introduces the pixel-image-processing capabilities of
QuickDraw. The concepts related to aliasing, and how to avoid it, are
discussed in detail. The chapter continues with an in-depth investigation into QuickDraw's important pixel-image-processing traps,
describing and demonstrating how the arguments to the pixelprocessing traps can be manipulated to produce a variety of useful,
interesting, or bizarre effects. The chapter concludes with a discussion
of depth and geometry conversions of pixel images.
~

Pixel-Processing Traps
Most QuickDraw drawing traps take shape definitions (such as lines,
circles, or rectangles) as input arguments. CopyBits(), on the other hand,
takes a pointer to a PixMap or BitMap as two of its input arguments.
Like other QuickDraw traps, CopyBits() renders the result into a pixel
image varible, either of type PixMap or BitMap. Thus, CopyBits()
transfers pixel image data between two pixel image variables.
To fully understand the capabilities of CopyBits(), you need to have
a solid conceptual model of all the variables that are used to transfer
an image. There are explicit parameters as well as two global variables
that affect the outcome of a call to CopyBits(). The roles that the
global variables play are discussed in the following section, preceded
by a description of the arguments explicitly passed to each trap.
The first of the three traps is CopyBits(), which has been around as
long as the Macintosh. The second trap, CopyMask(), was introduced
with the Macintosh Plus and System 3.2. The newest member of the
family, CopyDeepMask(), was introduced with System 7.0 and is
available only on Color QuickDraw machines. It encompasses and
expands on the functionality of the first two Pixel processing traps.

.,..

Pixel-Processing Traps

313

void CopyBits (
BitMap
*srcMap ,
BitMap
*destMap ,
Re ct
*srcRect ,
Rect
*destRect ,
short
transferMode ;
RgnHandle maskRgn ) ;
void CopyMask (
BitMap
*srcMap,
BitMap
*maskMap ,
BitMap
*destMap ,
Rect
*srcRect ,
*maskRect ,
Rect
Rect
*destRect ) ;
void CopyDeepMask (
*srcMap,
PixMap
*maskMap ,
PixMap
PixMap
*destMap,
*srcRect,
Re ct
*maskRect ,
Re ct
*destRect ,
Re ct
short
transferMode ,
RgnHandle maskRgn) ;

These three traps share the same underlying code; the difference is
in the explicit argument passed to them, and whether the results of
the traps can be saved into pictures or printed. Of the three Stretch
traps, only CopyBits() uses the StdBits() bottleneck and is therefore
the only one whose image results can be directly printed or saved in a
picture. This limitation can be overcome by creating the desired image
using CopyMask() or CopyDeepMask() and then copying the destination pixel image argument's contents using CopyBits() .

.___N_o_te_~_ _,J . Since these traps are similar, it's useful to refer to them generically. · '~
At Apple, it's customary to refer to them collectively as the Stretch
traps, which happens to be the name of the source file that implements them. This convention is followed here.

314

.,. Chapter 7 Image Processing with QuickDraw

..,_ Basic CopyDeepMask() and CopyMask()
Functionality
Combining two or more images to produce a third image is called
called image compositing and can be observed in television commercials, introductions to sports broadcasts, and other contemporary, videobased media. Color QuickDraw contains two traps that provide
substantial image compositing capabilities: CopyDeepMask() and
CopyMask(). The functionality of the CopyDeepMask() trap is a
perfect superset of those found in CopyMask().
Color Plates CP-2 and CP-3 show images produced with the System
7.0 version of CopyMask(). CP-2 simply uses a grayscale mask and
blends between the source and the destination. CP-3 uses a solid red
mask and demonstrates that the red color component is completely
masked.
Even the complicated results produced in these colored figures only
scratch the surface of the image compositing power of CopyDeepMask().
In all of the colored figures, both a srcCopy transfer mode and a
NULL "maskRgn" argument were used.
Additionally, all colored figures were generated with either a relatively simple mask or simple source pixel image. Imagine the possibilities when two complex images are combined. The addition of an
arithmetic transfer mode and/ or a complex masking region provides
even greater possibilities.
Note.,.

Many developers have been asking Apple for an alpha transfer
mode - a way to write to the unused high bit of 16-bit pixels or
to the high byte of 32-bit pixels. In most cases, the goal is to use
this value for blending or merging images. Currently, Apple evangelizes the use of CopyDeepMask() for performing merging/
blending operations .

..,_ Explicit Arguments
Image Buffers: srcMap, maskMap, dstMap

The versions of QuickDraw contained in all versions of System 6 and
the first public release of System 7.0 allow applications to pass a
pointer to a CGrafPort instead of a pointer to a PixMap, even though
it's not strictly correct. This may not hold true in future versions of
QuickDraw.

~

Pixel-Processing Traps

315

-..Important~

While the source and destination PixMaps can arbitrarily overlap
screen devices, the mask image cannot belong to a public graphics device; in other words, the mask image must be offscreen .

.....
As with "srcMap" and "dstMap," "maskMap" can be either a BitMap
or a PixMap pointer. For CopyMask(), prior to System 7.0 "maskBits" is
restricted to being a BitMap or 1-bit-per-pixel PixMap. In this case,
"maskMap" values are used in the same way as the "maskRgn"
argument: They determine whether the resulting pixel is affected or
not. If the pixel value in "maskMap" is black, the source value is used;
if it's white, the destination is left unchanged.
With System 7.0 the "maskMap" argument for CopyMask and the
new call CopyDeepMask() can be any valid pixel depth, including 16
and 32 bits per pixel. In this case, the index values in "maskMap" are
used as a weighting factor between the corresponding source and
destination pixel values, according to the same rules as the arithmetic
weighting color described in Chapter 3. Simply put, low RGB component values in "maskMap" select more of the source pixel value in the
result; greater "maskMap" values favor the destination pixel value.
Rectangles: srcRect, maskRect, destRect

These rectangles specify the active portion of the PixMap. A current
restriction is that the source and mask rectangles must be the same
size. The PixMap's coordinates are established by the bounds rectangle, and the "srcRect," "maskRect," and "destRect" arguments specify
a subset of this space.
Transfer Mode

The "transferMode" argument allows you to explicitly specify a transfer mode for CopyBits(). Most other QuickDraw traps use the current
port's pen mode as the transfer mode. Chapter 3 discusses the various
transfer modes.
There are only a few things to add about transfer modes. First,
search procedures are not called and colorizing does not occur for
arithmetic transfer modes. Second, the transfer mode operation occurs
after the source is colorized and the search procedure has been called.
Finally, the standard transfer modes operate in index space, not
color space. Thus, or-ing a multi-color image on an indexed and a
direct GDevice can produce different results, depending on the

316

llJJ.

Chapter 7 Image Processing with QuickDraw

images involved. This is most obvious when xor-ing a black image on
a 50 percent gray background. On a direct device, the operation is not
visible since colors in the result will all be $7FFF or $8000 hexadecimal: virtually indistinguishable. On an indexed device, the result
depends on the organization of the destination color table. For a
standard color table, yellow appears in the result image, a color
unrelated to the operation. Yellow appears only because of its location
in the color table. Figure 7-1 shows when the various operations occur
during a CopyDeepMask() call.
Source
pixel depth

Source
rectangle

Fg and Bg color
from thePort

~
~

Source
PixMap
Data

Destination
pixel depth

Destination
rectangle

Destination
data

I
I
I
I
I
I

1------------------------l
I
I
I
I

Region
parameter

Transfer
mode

ITable or
searchProc
from GDevice

L_.00
Vis and
clip regions
from port

Destination
data

Figure 7-1. CopyDeepMask() functional diagram

Resulting
PixMap

..,. Pixel-Processing Traps

317

Mask Region
This parameter is simply another region that further restricts the
affected area. Like with all QuickDraw calls, drawing is automatically
clipped to the intersection of the port's visRgn and clipRgn. When a
non-NULL mask region is specified, drawing is clipped to the intersection of the mask region and the port's regions .

..,. Global Arguments
A cause of great confusion, and a number of bugs, stems from the way
Color QuickDraw uses global variables when transferring pixel images. There are two global variables that are used: The current GrafPort
or CGrafPort (typically stored in the application global variable
"thePort"), and the current GDevice (pointed to by the low memory
global "theGDevice"). Clipping, colorizing information, and a number
of other variables are taken from the current port, while the GDevice
is used to determine how colors will be represented in the destination
pixel image, according to the rules of color mapping.

"thePort"
All QuickDraw traps use the current port for the destination of the
drawing. Because of the calling interface it may appear that the three
Stretch traps are an exception to this rule. As this section shows, these
traps use the current port for clipping and color information, just like
other QuickDraw calls.
CopyBits() provides slightly more flexibility than the standard
QuickDraw traps by allowing applications to explicitly specify the
destination PixMap. This can be confusing since it departs from the
standard QuickDraw model in which the destination is always the
current port's PixMap.Calls to CopyBits() are usually simpler than the
trap interface would indicate. To illustrate this point, let's consider a
simpler CopyBits().
void CopyBitsToPort(
BitMap *srcMap,
Rect
*srcRect,
Rect
*destRect );

Since CopyBits() is primarily used to update the current port, the
"dstBits" argument is simply a pointer to the portBits or portPixMap
field of "thePort." The transfer mode is almost always srcCopy, and

318

.,.. Chapter 7 Image Processing with QuickDraw

no additional clipping is needed, other than the current port's regions.
So the need to declare and assign variables for the arguments to CopyBits()
is often nothing more than excess baggage. Listing 7-1 shows how the
interface to CopyBits() can be simplified in this manner.
Listing 7-1. CopyBitsO simplified
void CopyBitsToPort(
BitMap *srcMap,
Rect
*srcRect,
Rect
*destRect
Ptr
Boolean

destMapPtr;
curPortisColor;

/* check if the current port is color */
curPortisColor = ((thePort->portVersion) & OxCOOO)

!= 0);

/* get reference to the port's BitMap/PixMap */
if (curPortisColor)
destMapPtr
*( ( (CGrafPtr)thePort)->portPixMap);
else
destMapPtr
&(thePort->portBits);
CopyBits(
srcMap, destMapPtr, srcRect, destRect,
srcCopy, (RgnHandle)NULL ) ;

This simplified version calls the "real" CopyBits() using the PixMap
from the current port as the "dstBits" argument and "srcCopy" as the
transfer mode argument. In this case no additional clip region is
specified, and the operation will affect only those pixels within the
intersection of the destination rectangle argument and the current
port's clipRgn and visRgn.
Even though CopyBits() can be passed any BitMap or PixMap pointer
to use as the destination, it's important to realize that CopyBits() still
uses a number of variables from the current port to perform the
operation. Specifically, the fgColor, bkColor (or rgbFgColor and rgbBkColor
for color ports), visRgn, clipRgn, colrBit, and picSave fields are used.
The colrBit field is used for color separation when printing classic
colors as described in Inside Macintosh, Volume I. The picSave field is
used to determine whether the call should be recorded in a picture.

..,.

Pixel-Processing Traps

319

Clipping and Visible Regions. As described in Chapter 3, all QuickDraw drawing operations are limited by the current port's visRgn and
clipRgn. During a call to CopyBits() that passes the current port's pixel
image as the destination, these regions further limit drawing by intersection with the mask region argument. If the destination pixel image
is not that of the current port's, then only the "maskRgn" argument is
used. Careless specification of destination rectangle and mask region
arguments can cause CopyBits() to write to memory outside of the pixel
image variable's baseAddr memory, usually causing application failure.
"theGDevice"

Like all other QuickDraw calls, the current GDevice determines how
pixels transferred by CopyBits() are represented in the destination
pixel image.
As discussed in Chapter 3, the default mapping of colors to a
GDevice is facilitated with inverse table lookups for indexed devices,
and by truncating RGB component values for direct devices. An application can augment, or completely replace, this default color mapping
by attaching a search procedure to the GDevice. QuickDraw will then
call the search procedure each time a color needs to be mapped to that
device. Search procedures are described in Chapter 3.
Destination Color Table. The color information for the destination PixMap is taken from the current GDevice, not from the destination PixMap's
ColorTable. Think about that for a moment : The destination
PixMap's ColorTable has nothing to do with how colors are drawn to
that PixMap. The ColorTable is used to describe what the pixel values
mean once they are in the PixMap. QuickDraw handles this for you
when drawing to the screen. When drawing offscreen an application
must ensure that the GDevice's color table is synchronized with the
destination PixMap's color table.
This is the same way the GDevice is used other places in QuickDraw.
In most cases, when drawing to a port on the screen or into an
offscreen GWorld, the current GDevice's PixMap and the destination
PixMap are the same. Problems occur more often with CopyBits(),
since it's easier to specify any PixMap as the destination .

.....
Important.,..

The color information for the destination PixMap is taken from the
current GDevice, not from the destination PixMap' s color table;
usually they are one and the same.

320

IJll.

Chapter 7 Image Processing with QuickDraw

Iii> Altering Images with CopyBits()
What Is Color Separation?

Color separation is a process that distills an image into a set of colors.
The most common use of color separation is in printing, where the
image is often printed in separate passes of cyan, magenta, yellow,
and black.
What Is Colorizing?

Colorizing is the result of applying a "nonblack" foreground and/ or a
"nonwhite" background color to a QuickDraw drawing operation. For
shape-drawing operations such as FrameRect(), the foreground and
background colors in the port determine the color of the shape for all
unspecified values in the pen pattern (see the discussion under "Color
Patterns" in Chapter 3). This effect is quite predictable and usually
desirable. It also gives applications a simple way to draw in color
without having to explicitly use color patterns.
For pixel transfers, the effect of colorizing is that high-pixel RGB
values in the source PixMap go to the foreground color and low-pixel
RGB values go to the background color.
CP-4D shows an example of the QuickDraw process called colorizing:
Once the destination pixel color is determined, all bits that are off are
given the value of the corresponding bit in the foreground color, and
all bits that are on are given the value of the corresponding bit in the
background color. In most situations, colorizing is undesirable and
can be suppressed by using a foreground color of black and a background color of white.
Colorizing a pixel is via the following formula:
Result = (bgColor AND src) OR (fgColor AND -src)
From the formula it is easy to see that if the bgColor is white (all
components $FFFF) and the fgColor is black (all components $0000)
the operation leaves the source value unchanged. If the fgColor is
white and the bgColor is black, the colorizing operation inverts the
source.
Before System 7.0, the problem was that the index, rather than the
color values, were being colorized. Thus the result depended on the
organization of the destination GDevice's ColorTable. Colorizing in
index space is defined only for source values that are zero or all ones

~

Pixel-Processing Traps

321

that go to the current port's "fgColor" and "bgColor" values respectively. In System 6, colorizing is useful primarily for transferring 1-bit
source images. In System 7, colorizing takes place in color space. This
form of colorizing is useful at all pixel depths. Figure 7-2 shows how
colorizing operations are performed.
Bit of color component of source

Resulting bit corresponding bit from
Foreground Color

o~~~~~~~~---

Background Color

lf15 lfl 4lf1 3lf12 lf11 lno If9 If8 If7 If6 If5 If4 If3 If2 Ifl IfO I f:c:,f:~ent of

I 1 I o I 1 I o I 1 I 1 I 1 I 1 I o I o I o I o I 1 I 1 I o I o I :?:!fe
lbl5lt14 lb131f12 lb11 lb10I b9 Ibs If7 If6 Its It4 I b3 I b2 Ifl Ito I result
Figure 7-2. Colorizing operations

This operation probably seems a trifle convoluted at first, but it
turns out to be quite useful. It provides an easy way to modify pixel
color values, and a variety of interesting results can be produced. For
example, by changing the foreground and background colors you can
invert, posterize, or even perform color separation. Color plates CP-4A
through CP-4F show a picture drawn several ways by changing only
the foreground and background colors. These colorizing techniques
are discussed in the following sections. Color plate CP-40 contains
primarily red with some yellow and magenta and was generated by
setting the foreground color to red ($FFFF, $0, $0) and the background
color to white ($FFFF, $FFFF, $FFFF). Therefore, the red component is
$FFFF hexadecimal for every pixel in the result. As CP-40 shows, the
gray areas of the image transform to shades of red, the green areas go
to yellow (red+ green), and the blue areas to magenta (red+ blue).

322

.,.. Chapter 7 Image Processing with QuickDraw

What Is Posterizing?

Posterizing is an effect produced by quantizing colors. For example,
rather than using a complete range of reds, greens, and blues to
represent an image, a posterizing effect can be· achieved by using only
the top bit of each RGB color component. To quantize or reduce the
colors to eight different levels, 1-bit each of red, green, and blue, the
foreground color should be set to black ($0, $0, $0) and the background color to gray ($8000, $8000, $8000). This strips the low bits of
each color, thus yielding only eight colors in the result. You could just
as easily maintain four levels (2-bits) of each color component using a
foreground color of black ($0, $0, $0) and a background color of very
light gray ($COOO, $COOO, $COOO). This would yield
= 2 (2 bits x 3 components)
= 26
= 64 colors

The image in CP-4C, was generated using the image in CP-4A.
CP-4C has only solid colors of red, green, blue, cyan, magenta, yellow,
and gray, and was generated by using a background color of white
($FFFF, $FFFF, $FFFF) and a foreground color of gray ($8000, $8000,
$8000).
Colorizing Techniques

Inverting. Inverting an image in color space simply means changing
the black pixels to white and the white pixels to black. This basically
produces a negative of the source image. This is useful for highlighting user interface objects such as buttons, as shown in Figure 7-3.
This effect can be achieved by using the notSrcCopy transfer mode,
or by setting the foreground color to white and the background color
to black. When the foreground color is white ($FFFF, $FFFF, $FFFF),
every bit that is off will be turned on. When the background color is
black ($0, $0, $0), every bit that is on will be turned off. The result is a
color space inversion of the source image.
You can also invert just one color component. For example, to invert
the red component you would set the foreground color to red ($FFFF,
$0, $0) and the background color to cyan ($0, $FFFF, $FFFF).
Three of the images (CP-4B, CP-4E, and CP-4F) use inversion. CP-4B
was generated using a foreground color of white ($FFFF, $FFFF, $FFFF)
and a background color of black ($0, $0, $0).

~

Pixel-Processing Traps

323

Figure 7-3. Buttons highlighted by color inversion
CP-4E was generated using a foreground color of white ($FFFF,
$FFFF, $FFFF) and a background color of gray ($8000, $8000, $8000).
This has the effect of inverting all the bits and forcing the high bit of
each color component to 1. This image, therefore, contains no black.
CP-4F was generated using a foreground color of gray ($8000, $8000,
$8000) and a background color of gray ($7FFF, $7FFF, $7FFF). This
inverts only the high bit of each color component. This is an alternative way to highlight. The problem with inverting all the bits is that
gray ($8000, $8000, $8000) goes to gray ($7FFF, $7FFF, $7FFF). These
two grays are indistinguishable since they are immediately adjacent in
color space. By inverting only the high bit, you guarantee that all
colors will shift by the same amount in RGB color space.
Color Separation. With foreground and background colorizing, it's
possible to separate an image into its red, green, and blue components. The technique is simple: Set the foreground color to black and
set the background color to the component you want. To get the blue
component, for example, set the background color to pure blue ($0, $0,
$FFFF).
An application can also perform CMY color separation by setting
the foreground and background color and calling CopyBits(). The
routine in Listing 7-2 shows an example of this. In this example, a
picture with resource ID 1000 is separated into its cyan, magenta, and
yellow components.

324

~

Chapter 7 Image Processing with QuickDraw

Listing 7-2. Color separation example
#define

PICTResID

1000

void CMYColorSeparation( void
Re ct
long
RGBColor
GDHandle
CGraf Ptr
GWorldPtr
PixMapHandle
PicHandle
OS Err

boundsR, destR;
*bitsPtr;
myrgb, savergb;
savedGD;
savedPort;
myOffGWorld;
myPixMapHandle;
myPicHandle;
errStat;

myPicHandle = GetPicture( PICTResID ) ;
if (myPicHandle == NULL)
return;
/* failed -> exit */
boundsR = (*myPicHandle)->picFrame;
OffsetRect( &boundsR, -boundsR.left, -boundsR.top );
errStat = NewGWorld( &myOffGWorld, 32, &boundsR, NULL,
NULL, OL ) ;
if (errStat != noErr)
{

GetGWorld( &savedPort, &savedGD ) ;
GetForeColor( &savergb ) ;
SetGWorld( myOffGWorld, NULL ) ;
EraseRect( &boundsR ) ;

/* clear the GWorld */

#ifdef _GET_GWPM_FIXED_
myPixMapHandle
GetGWorldPixMap( myOffGWorld ) ;
#else
myOffGWorld->portPixMap;
myPixMapHandle
#endif _GET_GWPM_FIXED_
(void)LockPixels( myPixMapHandle );
DrawPicture( myPicHandle, &boundsR ) ;
/* copy the separations into window */
SetGWorld( savedPort, savedGD );

.,.. Pixel-Processing Traps

325

/* separate out the yellow component */
myrgb.red = OxFFFF;
myrgb.green = OxFFFF;
myrgb.blue = O;
RGBForeColor( &myrgb );
CopyBits(
*myPixMapHandle, &(thePort->portBits),
&boundsR, &destR, srcCopy, NULL ) ;
OffsetRect( &destR, 220, 0 ) ;
/* separate out the magenta component */
myrgb.red = OxFFFF;
myrgb.green = O;
myrgb.blue = OxFFFF;
RGBForeColor( &myrgb ) ;
CopyBits(
*myPixMapHandle, &(thePort->portBits),
&boundsR, &destR, srcCopy, NULL ) ;
OffsetRect( &dstRect, -220, 220 ) ;
/* separate out the cyan component */
myrgb.red = O;
myrgb.green = OxFFFF;
myrgb.blue = OxFFFF;
RGBForeColor( &myrgb );
CopyBits(
*myPixMapHandle, &(thePort->portBits),
&boundsR, &destR, srcCopy, NULL ) ;
OffsetRect( &destR, 220, 0 ) ;
RGBForeColor( &savergb ) ;
DisposGWorld( myOffGWorld ) ;

Grayscale Remapping. An application can also use a search procedure to add color to a grayscale image. Suppose you have a grayscale
image where grays in the range ($6000, $6000, $6000) to ($AOOO,
$AOOO, $AOOO) represent a critical area and you would like to remap
them to varying levels of red. Since the source image is known to be
grayscale (that is, all RGB component values are equal), the search
procedure needs to check only one component of the color to determine the intensity of gray. Listing 7-3 illustrates this technique.

326

~

Chapter 7 Image Processing with QuickDraw

Listing 7-3. Grayscale to color remapping example
pascal Boolean MapGrayToRed(
RGBColor *targetRGB,
long
*result )

if ( (targetRGB->red >= Ox6000) &&
(targetRGB->red < OxAOOO))
targetRGB->red = (targetRGB->red - Ox6000) << 2;
targetRGB->green = O;
targetRGB->blue = O;
return FALSE;

...,. Aliasing
There are basically two kinds of graphics: object graphics and
bitmapped graphics. Applications like MacDraw deal with graphics as
objects. In such "Draw" applications, a graphic item, such as a circle,
is stored either as a position and a radius or simply as a bounding
rectangle. The resolution of the object is usually determined at render
time: If it's being printed on a LaserWriter, it will appear at 300 dpi. If
it's drawn on the screen, it will appear at 72 dpi. However, if the
graphic items are copied to the clipboard, they are typically put into a
picture and the picture's data is then copied to the System scrap,
maintaining its resolution-independent nature.
Painting applications, such as MacPaint and ArtToy (which was
described in Chapters 5 and 6) deal predominantly with graphics as
pixel images. When a circle is drawn, it's rendered into a PixMap or
BitMap and the original definition of the shape is discarded: The circle
is nothing more than a pattern of values scattered around the pixel
image. The resolution is determined by the destination pixel-image
buffer, which is typically 72 dpi. If this pixel image is printed on a
graphics device of a different resolution, it will show the effects of
aliasing, the manifestation of which is jagged "stair-step" edges where
smooth curves or lines are expected.
Figure 7-4 shows the difference between a circle printed on a LaserWriter by a Draw application (hereafter called Draw) and one printed
by a hypothetical painting application (or Paint). This illustrates the
differences between rendering a nonrasterized circle (using FrameOval())
compared to rendering a rasterized circle (using CopyBits()).

~

MacDraw Circle

Aliasing

327

MacPaint Circle

Figure 7-4. Circle printed in "Draw" versus "Paint"
Notice that Draw's circle is smooth, while Paint's circle has aliased
edges. The difference stems from the way these programs store the
circle: Draw retains the circle's definition (simply its bounds rectangle), whereas Paint images the circle into a PixMap or BitMap and
uses CopyBits() to "draw" it into the destination graphics device.
When you print, Draw renders the circle at the resolution of the
destination device. Paint, on the other hand, simply uses CopyBits()
to scale its pixel image up to (or down to) the printer's resolution.
Since the printer has higher than 72-dpi resolution, the "jaggies" in
the source pixel image are visible.
Note ll>

~

Since a LaserWriter is a bitmapped printer, Draw's circle also has
aliased edges. These rough edges are much harder to see since they
are at the printer's bitmap resolution (300 dpi), .rather than the
resolution of screen bitmap (72 dpi) as used by the paint application. If Draw' s circle were rendered by a plotter, there would be
no jagged edges at all. If Paint's application circle were rendered
by a plotter, the jagged edges would still be evident.
Because of the way these applications store their images, paint and
draw programs provide the user with different tools. For example, a
paint application allows the user to modify individual pixels of the

328

~

Chapter 7 Image Processing with QuickDraw

target bitmap. Paint applications often have a paint bucket tool for
filling areas of the bitmap. In a draw application, editing at the pixel
level doesn't make sense, since the drawn objects are inherently resolution-independent. Draw applications usually provide shape-based
operators, such as shape selection and resizing.
Elegant solutions for seamlessly combining rasterized (paint) and
nonrasterized (draw) graphics have eluded Macintosh software designers and developers. For example, what would a paint/ draw application do when a user resizes a shape that has been filled with a
paint bucket? Does the paint flow to fill the new borders or does it
remain unchanged, slopping over the edges where a shape was moved?
As discussed in the earlier chapters, QuickDraw has traps for dealing with both drawing objects and manipulating pixel images. Whether
you are writing a draw or paint application depends on how the
objects are rendered: If they're rendered into a pixel-image map when
they are drawn, it's a paint application; if the application maintains a
list of the shapes and updates the display by drawing the shape list,
it's a draw application.
~

Rasterizing
As discussed in Chapter 5, rasterization is the process of generating a
pixel image from drawing operations. Aliasing is a term taken from
signal processing and refers to a situation where a signal is
undersampled. An important consequence of rasterizing operations is
that a continuous graphic shape is inherently sampled in order to
determine which pixels to set. Pixels values are, by nature, atomic,
discrete, and otherwise indivisible entities. Determining which pixels
to change and which values to assign to them is essentially a sampling
operation. Aliasing is the most prominent, visible side effect of undersampling, and may be expressed in the geometric (x and y) axes as
jagged edges or in the pixel value (z) axis as blotches of color in place
of continuously shaded domains.
For example, the triangle wave shown in Figure 7-5, section A, is
sampled in locations where the black dots appear. Unless the frequency content of the source signal is known, these samples do not
provide enough information to distinguish between the waveform
shown in Figure 7-5, section A, and that shown in Figure 7-5, section
B. Based on these samples, the waveform shown in Figure 7-5, section
B, takes on the identity, or is an alias of, the waveform shown in
Figure 7-5, section A.

..,. Aliasing

329

A

B

Figure 7-5. Example of aliased waveforms

Figure 7-6 shows how undersampling can manifest itself as aliasing
in computer graphics. The rectangular grid represents pixel locations
on the screen. The objective is to render the black object as it moves
across the grid. Since the resolution of the object is higher than the
resolution of the grid, the image is undersampled.
A first cut at a solution might be to turn the pixel element on if the
object intersects the top-left corner of the pixel, and to turn the pixel
element off otherwise. Using this method requires sampling the source
image at points where the grid intersects. Below each grid is a graph
showing the source waveform for the scan line marked with an arrow.
In Figure 7-6, section A, one pixel would be turned on since the
waveform is on at the sample point. In Figure 7-6, section B, the object
does not intersect any horizontal grid line and will not appear at all .

•

.H. • • • • • • • •H• • •
A

B

Figure 7-6. Signals and 2-D graphics sampling

c

330

~

Chapter 7 Image Processing with QuickDraw

In Figure 7-6, section C, the object intersects a horizontal grid line, but
not at a location that is sampled. The waveform that is being sampled
has a much higher frequency than the sampling rate. The problem is
further compounded since the image is reconstructed with pixels that
have only two values, on or off. Using this method of sampling and
reconstruction, the resulting image flashes as it crosses the screen.
There are two basic strategies for reducing aliasing: increase the
sampling rate or decrease the frequency of the source signal. Implementations of these strategies are collectively known as antialiasing
techniques. The prevailing techniques rely on methods to functionally
increase the sampling rate. Let's proceed with an example of oversampling.
Since the resolution of the output device (namely the screen) is
fixed, each screen pixel must represent several samples. Suppose the
output graphics device has four possible levels (0-3) for each pixel. If
the sampling frequency is increased by a factor of two in each direction, the grids in Figure 7-7, section A, become the grids shown in
Figure 7-7, section B.

•
A

B

c

Figure 7-7. Antialiasing by oversampling
There are now four samples taken for each pixel, and the value of
the resulting pixel is simply the number of points that intersect the
object. Thus, if the object completely covers a pixel, the pixel is turned
on (given a value of 3). If the object doesn't intersect the pixel at all,
the pixel is turned off (given a value of 0). If the object covers about
half the pixel, the pixel is a shade of gray (given a value of 1 or 2). If
the object is rendered this way, it appears gray as it crosses the screen.
An even better result can be achieved with a still higher sampling
frequency. If each screen pixel can take one of 256 values, the sampling frequency can be increased by a factor of 8 in each direction.

llll- Aliasing

331

Drawing an object in this way requires knowing the shape of the
object at a resolution higher than the screen resolution. Using gray
values to account for round-off error where pixels are partially covered creates the illusion of higher resolution by recovering the lack of
geometric (x-y) resolution in the pixel value (z) dimension .

...,. Aliased Regions
In addition to pixel images, regions can also be distorted by aliasing
effects. Because regions capture the results of drawing commands
rather than the shape's characteristic formula (for example, a circle: x2
+ y 2 = r 2 ), both InsetRgnO and MapRgn() impart distortions to the
region's original shape. If a region is treated as a "snapshot" of lineoriented graphics operations, then the possibilities for region aliasing
should become clear. A region contains scan line-oriented data, just
like a pixel image, and is therefore subject to aliasing whenever it's
geometrically scaled or rendered into a graphics device of a different
resolution than the one in which the region was created. This means
that all lines and curves get distorted when the region's dimensions
are scaled in any direction, with the exception of perfect vertical or
horizontal lines. Examine the framed regions in Figures 7-8 and 7-9.

01100
Unscaled

Inset Once

Inset Many

Mapped Once Mapped Many

Figure 7-8. Region distortions, inset

OD.DOD
Unscaled

Outset Once

Outset Many Mapped Once Mapped Many

Figure 7-9. Region distortions. outset

332

~

Chapter 7 Image Processing with QuickDraw

The region on the far left of Figure 7-8 was created by capturing a
FrameOval() trap after the bounding rectangle was scaled inward
with InsetRect(). All the other regions were produced by capturing
the innermost oval into a region and scaling the region itself. The
regions in Figure 7-9 are produced identically to those in Figure 7-8,
but they start with a smaller shape and scale outward. Because each
shape is larger and has more detail than its predecessor, the aliasing
effect is much greater than those produced by shrinking operations.
From these examples, we can draw a couple of conclusions about
using regions to accurately represent an area:
• A region should be created by line and frame commands that
most closely define that area without scaling.
• A region should be created at the highest resolution at which it's
expected to be accurate.
• Regions shouldn't be relied on as the sole representation of a
shape. Whenever possible, keep the original shape data available
for future operations.
~

Antialiased Lines
Aliasing is a side-effect of taking discrete samples of a continuous
image. In any sampling operation, there is an implied quantization, or
round-off, error. Figure 7-10 illustrates this error as manifested in line
drawing operations. The problem is determining what to display for
the pixels that are only partly covered by the line.
Although the goal may be to render a solid black line, the final
output can be improved substantially by using gray values for the
pixels that are partially covered. This antialiasing produces the illusion of higher resolution graphics by using sub-pixel techniques to
lessen the effects of rounding errors. Figure 7-11 shows a magnified
view of a line drawn with and without antialiasing.
Whenever a line is drawn in QuickDraw, it's rendered in one solid
color. As with most image processing techniques, there are a number
of ways to produce the desired result. In the first issue of develop
magazine (Apple Computer, January 1990), Bruce Leak describes a
simple way to do antialiased drawing. The procedure for achieving
the gray pixels is similar to that used in a following sub-pixel stretching section. The following example outlines the technique.
Suppose an application needs to draw an antialiased line on top of a
72-dpi PixMap. First it must determine the bounding rectangle of the

CP.4

CP.1

The complete aE color diagram.
(Oourtesv of GE Lighting.)

,,.

:/

CP.5

·.1'

A

B

c

D

. . . -::w-:.:.°"

.. . ~. . .. .

q

.

.

#

B

A

•

'

"
CP.6

c

A-Original

C- Default System

B-Popular

D-~dian

CP.7

..,. Antialiased Lines

333

Figure 7-10. Sampling a line

Figure 7-11. Magnified view of a line drawn with and without
antialiasing
line. The CopyBits() trap can be used to copy the contents of that
rectangle from the destination PixMap, scaling it up by some integral
factor (four works well). Draw the line in the expanded PixMap. Note
that the line has higher resolution than the PixMap by a factor equal
to the amount the PixMap was scaled up. Finally, use dithered shrink
to shrink it back to its original size.
The result is that the old pixel values will remain unchanged since
they were expanded and shrunk by the same amount; an operation
which doesn't change them. The line, which was rendered at the
higher (effectively) resolution will be averaged with the surrounding
pixels when it is shrunk. This produces smoother edges.

334

IJlll.

Chapter 7 Image Processing with QuickDraw

I Important .,..

The key to antialiased drawing is that the representation of the image is known at a resolution higher than the destination resolution.

..,. Antialiased Text
Aliased text is all too familiar to computer users, largely because most
typefaces are pixel images. This was the case with QuickDraw on the
Macintosh prior to TrueType (available as an INIT for System 6 users
and part of the System 7.0 release). To generate fonts of sizes for
which no BitMap exists, QuickDraw simply picked the closest font
size and stretched or shrunk the bits. Unfortunately, when a BitMap is
resized, the resulting image is often far from pleasing.
TrueType fonts are algorithmically generated from line segment and
curve descriptions, rather than produced from individual character
bitmaps. This means that QuickDraw knows the shape of the character, much like QuickDraw knows the shape of a circle. Thus, when the
character is scaled, its shape, rather than its BitMap, is scaled. This
provides an excellent representation of the letter at all scaling factors.
Furthermore, since the shape of the letter is known at a resolution
(essentially infinite) higher than the display resolution (usually 72
dpi), text is an excellent candidate for antialiasing.
One technique for producing antialiased text is a direct extension of
the discussion in the previous sections. The text is drawn at a certain
size, for example four times larger than the intended destination. Next
this pixel image is shrunk to the destination size using the ditherCopy
mode. This produces a 4-bit grayscale PixMap which is solid black in
the center of the letters and gray around the edges. When this PixMap
is used as a mask argument to CopyDeepMask() (System 7.0 and later
only) the result is smooth text.
To draw antialiased text using CopyDeepMask(), a source and a
mask PixMap are required. The source PixMap can be generated as
desired, and the CreateTextMask() routine creates the mask PixMap
automatically. Figure 7-12 shows how CreateTextMask() generates the
soft mask.
Notice in this figure that the edges of the text are gray. (This is
particularly visible on the edges of the 'W' .) When this soft edge mask
is used by CopyDeepMask(), the result is a soft, or antialiased edge.

~

Antialiased Text

335

e o,
Large I-bit GW>rld

Bello, World

Scale factor: x4
using dither mode

4-bit mask GWorld

Magnified view of 4-bit mask GW>rld

Figure 7-12. Creating a masking pixel image from text
The routine works as follows. First the text is imaged at four times
the final resolution into a 1-bit GWorld. If there isn't enough memory
in the application heap or temporary memory to allocate a GWorld
this big, GWorlds of three times and then two times the final resolution are created. If all of these attempts fail, NULL is returned. Otherwise, the text is imaged into the 1-bit GWorld, scaled by a factor of 2,
3, or 4 (or whatever multiple the 1-bit GWorld is) in each direction.
Then the text pixel image is copied and shrunk from large 1-bit
GWorld to the 4-bit GWorld. This operation is performed by CopyBits(),
using the ditherCopy transfer mode (discussed later in this chapter).
Since the mask will consist only of grays, the 4-bit GWorld is given a
grayscale ColorTable. The 1-bit GWorld has served its purpose, and is
disposed . The 4-bit grayscale image just created is returned by
CreateTextMask().

336

..,. Chapter 7

Image Processing with QuickDraw

Notice that this routine may return a GWorld allocated in temporary
memory, so the application must dispose of the GWorld before calling
WaitNextEvent(), as shown in Listing 7-4.
Listing 7-4. Creating a mask PixMap from text
GWorldPtr CreateTextMask(
char
*text,
Rect
*boundsR,
long
textLen )
PixMapHandle
CTabHandle
GDHandle
CGraf Ptr
GWorldPtr
Rect
OS Err
short
short
theFont
theFace

bigPixMap, maskPixMap;
ctab;
savedGD;
savedPort;
maskWorld, bigWorld;
aBigR;
errStat;
theFont, theFace;
width, height, zoom;
thePort->txFont;
thePort->txFace;

/*create the 4-bit maskWorld */
ctab = GetCTable( 4+32 ) ;
errStat = NewGWorld( &maskWorld, 4, boundsR, ctab, NULL,
useTempMem ) ;
if (errStat != noErr)
errStat = NewGWorld( &maskWorld, 4, boundsR, ctab, NULL,
OL ) ;

if (errStat != noErr)
{

DisposHandle( ctab ) ;
return NULL;
/* create the super-sampling bigWorld */
zoom = 4;
width = boundsR->right - boundsR->left;
height = boundsR->bottom - boundsR->top;
while (TRUE)

.,.. Antialiased Text

SetRect( &aBigR, 0, 0, width* zoom, height * zoom ) ;
errStat = NewGWorld( &bigWorld, 1, &aBigR, NULL, NULL,
useTempMem ) ;
if (errStat != noErr)
errStat = NewGWorld( &bigWorld, 1, &myRectBig, NULL,
NULL, OL ) ;
if (errStat == noErr)
break;
zoom--;
i f (zoom == 1)
{

DisposGWorld( maskWorld ) ;
return NULL;

/* render the text into bigWorld */
GetGWorld( &savedPort, &savedGD ) ;
SetGWorld( bigWorld, NULL ) ;
TextFont( theFont * zoom);
TextFace( theFace );
bigPixMap = GetGWorldPixMap( bigWorld )
LockPixels( bigPixMap ) ;
TextBox( text, textL~n, &aBigR, teJustLeft ) ;
/* image into destination 4-bit maskWorld */
maskPixMap = GetGWorldPixMap( maskWorld ) ;
LockPixels( maskPixMap ) ;
SetGWorld( maskWorld, NULL);
CopyBits(
*bigPixMap, *maskPixMap, &aBigR, boundsR,
ditherCopy I srcCopy, NULL);
UnlockPixels( maskPixMap ) ;
/* clean up */
DisposHandle( ctab );
DisposGWorld( bigWorld );
SetGWorld( savedPort, savedGD ) ;
return maskWorld;

337

338

..,. Chapter 7 Image Processing with QuickDraw

Using this technique for drawing antialiased text works great for
drawing to deep PixMaps, but is less than optimal in many other
situations, such as printing. If you maintain the text rather than image
it into bits, the print driver can do its best to produce a high resolution
printout. Most printers provide the option of substituting an outline
font for a bitmap font at print time if an outline version of the
requested font isn't available .

.,... Review of Key Points
The pixel processing traps CopyBits(), CopyMask(), and CopyDeepMask()
provide great flexibility in transferring images. When you understand
how the explicit trap arguments and implicit QuickDraw state affect
the outcome of the trap call, you have a powerful tool at your disposal
for performing a number of standard, and nonstandard, image processing functions.
System 7.0 provides a considerable amount of new functionality to
these traps. Averaged shrink, colorizing, search procedures, and the
ditherCopy mode provide simple and flexible ways of producing
varied, high-quality images .

..,.. Depth Conversion and Dithering
Depending on the operation, there is quite a bit of processing that can
occur inside the Stretch traps. If the source and destination PixMaps
are of different depths, then the Stretch traps must perform a depth
conversion. A depth conversion involves finding an appropriate mapping between the color values in the source and those available on the
current graphics device .

.,... Depth Conversion Cases
There are four distinct types of depth conversion:
• indexed to indexed
• direct to indexed
• indexed to direct
• direct to direct

..,. Depth Conversion and Dithering

339

Depth conversion to an indexed destination can happen in two
different ways, depending on whether or not the dither flag is set. The
most basic form of depth conversion replaces each source pixel with
its closest representation in the destination. This is how the Stretch
traps produce destination pixel values when the dither flag isn't set.

Indexed to Indexed
For indexed-to-indexed depth conversions, Stretch creates a translation table. For example, if a 16-color (4-bit) PixMap is copied into a
256-color (8-bit) PixMap, the Stretch traps create a color table with
sixteen entries, one for each possible value in the source. Once the
table is built, depth conversion occurs with a simple table lookup. If a
search procedure is installed, it's called for each entry in the table.

Indexed to Direct
Indexed-to-direct depth conversion is straightforward: Since the maximum number of unique source pixel values is 256, a color table is
created to perform the conversion via lookup. For 1-bit to N-bit depth
conversions, the Stretch traps are particularly fast, since there are only
two possible output values. As before, any installed search procedure
is called once for each entry in the color table.

Direct to Indexed
Setting up a mapping table does not work for direct-to-indexed depth
conversions because of the prohibitively large number of possible
source (direct) pixel values. For indexed sources, the largest possible
translation table is 256 bytes; for 32-bit direct color (8-8-8), a translation table of 16.8 million entries would be necessary, no.t counting the
high byte. For execution time and memory limitations, this simply
isn't practical.
Direct-to-indexed depth conversion is accomplished by calling the
search procedure (if one is installed) or using inverse table lookup for
every source pixel, as described in Chapter 3. Unlike Color2Index(),
which accommodates hidden colors, the Stretch traps use the inverse
table without the hidden color mechanism for performance reasons.
Thus, depth conversion from direct-to-indexed pixel images reduces
to a simple lookup in the inverse table.
If a search procedure is present, it's called for every pixel in the
source. For indexed sources, the search procedure (on each intersecting graphics device) is called a maximum of 258 times: once for every

340

.,.. Chapter 7 Image Processing with QuickDraw

color in the. source PixMap (256 maximum), and once for the foreground and background colors. For direct sources, the search procedure is called for every pixel in the source. For a typical screen-sized
(640-by-480) pixmap, the search procedure is called 307,202 times:
once for every pixel in the source, 307,200 times, and then once for the
foreground and background colors.
Note Iii>-

The table lookup associated with direct-to-indexed depth conversion
is slightly more complicated than the table lookup necessary for
indexed-to-indexed depth conversion. The reason is that the index
for the inverse table looklip is calculated using a certain number
of high bits (specified by the inverse table resolution) from each
color component (R, G, and B) of the source pixel. In the indexedto-indexed case, the source pixel value itself is used as the index.
Direct to Direct

There are two possible cases, 32-bit-to-16-bit and 16-bit-to-32-bit
depth conversion. In the direct-to-direct case, table lookup is again
impractical, due to the potentially large number of unique source
pixel values. The 32- to 16-bit conversion is accomplished by truncating the 32-bit value (8-8-8) to a 16-bit value (5-5-5).
The 16- to 32-bit conversion is accomplished by replicating bits.
Figure 7-13 shows a 5-bits-per-component replication converted into
an 8-bits-per-component replication, as well as a 5-bits-per-component
replication to a 16-bits-per-component replication.
This figure shows that the 5 source bits of the color component are
used as the top 5 bits of the destination. The low 3 bits of the
destination are the top 3 bits of the source. In the 5-to-16 case, the 5
source bits appear in the result three times, and the top source bit
appears four times. At first it may seem that simply copying the top 5
bits is good enough, until you realize that it is impossible to get pure
white ($FF hexadecimal) using this technique since the low bits are
always 0. By replicating the top bits into the low bits, the 5-bit source
pixels map linearly to the entire 8-bit- or 16-bit-per-color component
destination.

~

Depth Conversion and Dithering

Component of source pixel
....-.......

.......

~....--

''

.....

~....--

a b c d

''

341

'

Component of result

Component of source pixel

Component of result

Figure 7-13. 5-to-8-bit and 5-to-16-bit component conversion using
pixel replication

..._ What Are Dithering and Error Diffusion?
When copying into a pixel image whose pixel size is less than that of
the source image, some amount of image data is lost in the depth
conversion process. This loss of image data is a form of aliasing and
tends to produce blotchy areas in the destination where smooth shaded
areas existed in the source. The difference between source and destination color values is a quantization (or roundoff) error. If this difference
error is summed up and redistributed over neighboring pixels, then
the resulting image appears substantially similar to the source image.
This technique is called dithering or error diffusion and can be invoked
when calling the stretch traps. The sixth bit in the transfer mode is known
as the dither flag and can be set by adding or bit-oring the ditherCopy
value of 64 into the transfer mode, as shown in Listing 7-5.

342

IJJJ.

Chapter 7 Image Processing with QuickDraw

Listing 7-5. Setting the dither flag
void UseDitherMode( void
{

short

newTransferMode;

newTransferMode = srcCopy I ditherCopy;
CopyBits(
*srcPM, *destPM, &srcR, &destR,
newTransferMode, (RgnHandle)NULL ) ;

..., How CopyBits() Dithers
There is a major shortcoming with the depth-conversion techniques
just discussed. The problem is most pronounced when converting a
deep source pixmap to a destination that has few colors. For example,
converting a 50 percent gray pixmap to a 1-bit destination results in
solid white. A more desirable result can be achieved through dithering the destination by alternating black and white pixel values, thus
preserving the source image's overall lum~nance content.
The same applies to color transfers. If the source contains a smooth
red ramp and the destination has only a few different values of red,
the image resulting from the depth conversion will have a blotchy
appearance rather than the smooth transition in the source, as shown
in Figure 7-14.
Dithering is a process that preserves the color content of the source
PixMap. There are a number of different algorithms for producing
dither effects. QuickDraw' s algorithm was chosen on the basis of
speed (it has to be fast) and memory (it should use a minimal amount
of memory). The basic theory of QuickDraw's dithering algorithm is
that if a requested color is not available on the destination, the closest
approximation is used and the difference between the color used and
the requested color is kept in an error variable. This error is added to
surrounding pixel values so that the color content of an area is maintained. The process is then repeated.
Depending on the QuickDraw version, the error propagation is
performed in different ways. In Color QuickDraw, half the error is
diffused (spread around) to those pixels to the right and left, and the
other half is spread downward. The error is spread to the right on
even scan lines and to the left on odd scan lines.

.,...

Depth Conversion and Dithering

Without Dither

343

With Dither

Figure 7- 14. Example of dithering
Because of the extra processing that dithering requires, dither-copying
an image is considerably slower than a non-dithered copy operation. The
trade-off between image quality and execution time is significant and
should be considered when designing image-intensive applications:

.,.. Image Resizing
When the source and destination rectangles are different sizes (in x
and y, not pixel depth), the Stretch trap stretches or shrinks the source
PixMap to fill the destination. Since these operations are independent
in the horizontal and vertical dimensions (for example, shrinking in
one dimension operates independently of scaling, if any, in the other
dimension), only the vertical case is discussed. How this operation is
performed and the effect of the dither flag (yes, the dither flag affects
shrinking) is discussed in this section.

344

..,_ Chapter 7 Image Processing with QuickDraw

Image Stretching
There are a number of ways to enlarge a PixMap. The easiest (and
fastest) is pixel duplication, which is the technique used by QuickDraw.
The procedure is simple: Duplicate existing rows of pixel values. For
stretching by a factor of 2, for example, each source scan line appears
twice in the destination. For stretching by a factor of 1.5, every other
row in the source pixel image appears twice. As shown in Figure 7-15,
this technique works fine for scaling by an integral amount, but leaves
something to be desired for nonintegral scaling amounts.

Original

Scaled 150%

Scaled200%

Figure 7-15. Integral and non-integral image stretching
From an image content perspective, stretching by noninteger amounts
is less than optimal. It would be better if each row of pixel values in the
source contributed equally to the destination, rather than (as in Figure
7-15) having some rows contribute twice as much as others. There is a
way to achieve an equal contribution when stretching, but you'll have
to wait until we're done discussing shrinking to find out how.

Image Shrinking
No Dithering. As with stretching, there are a number of different
ways to shrink an image. It may seem reasonable to simply drop rows
of pixel values when shrinking - basically the opposite operation of
stretching, where rows of pixels are replicated. This is a bad idea
because images could disappear completely. What if you shrink a
pattern of alternating black-and-white horizontal lines by a factor of
2? You would get either an all-black or an all-white image, depending
on the alignment of the lines.

..,. Depth Conversion and Dithering

345

Since most images are drawn on a white backg:ound, and it's obviously undesirable to have an image disappear when shrinking, QuickDraw preserves the black content of an image when shrinking without
dither. The way this occurs depends on the depth of the source
PixMap.
1-Bit Images. To shrink a 1-bit image, QuickDraw uses the Boolean
OR operator to merge rows of pixel values. For example, to shrink
vertically by a factor of 2, every two scan lines are OR' d together.
Since black pixels are represented by a bit being turned on, the result
moves toward black. Figure 7-16 shows a portion of an image processed in this way. In particular, notice that the gray (black-and-white
dithered) background ends up black.

• ;1

Control Panel

•m

ColorMap

.

Rate of Insertion

Point Blinking

..

0 ® 0

Desktop Pattern

IJJl

Dimmer

&]
EnComCdev

F.- .!I
Keyboard

3 .3.2

Menu Blinking

~
.

0 00®
Off 1 2 3

Slow

Time

Fast

<]

2:04: 15 AM

@ 12hr. 024hr.

5 -

421-

3 -

Date

~

5/ B/ 90

@on
RAM Cache !128K I (;}
Ooff

9

w=

1---.i.....:.::..;:=---l

ji'

o-

Speaker

Volume

Figure 7- 16. 1-bit shrinking by 50 percent

Indexed Images. For these source depths, OR-ing the indexes
together does not make sense: Colors can occur in the result that
weren't in the source. This is obviously undesirable. Again, QuickDraw's goal is to preserve the darker colors. Unfortunately, there is no
fast way to do this, and the shortcut QuickDraw .takes is to simply use
the largest pixel index value. For a grayscale color table, where $0 is
white and $FF is black, this achieves the desired result. In other cases,
the result depends on the ordering of colors in the destination
GDevice's ColorTable. While this technique is far from producing an
optimal shrink, it's very fast and produces adequate results.

346

..,,. Chapter 7 Image Processing with QuickDraw

Direct Images. As of System 7.0, both 16- and 32-bit images are
averaged when shrunk. Prior to the 7.0 version of QuickDraw, 16-bit
images were not averaged when shrunk. Since direct color images
deal directly in color space rather than in index space, it's relatively
easy and fast to average neighboring colors. Thus, shrinking an image
that consists of alternating red and blue lines by a factor of 2 will
produce an image result of solid purple.
Dithered Shrinking. It may come as a surprise, but setting the dither
flag affects the way images are shrunk. Setting the dither flag directs
QuickDraw to convert the source to 32-bit data, thus causing the pixel
values to be averaged when shrinking. Figure 7-17 shows the results
of shrinking a 1-bit image by a factor of 2 with and without dithering:
In both cases the destination pixel image was 32 bits deep. The dithered version contains black and white as well as three different grays.

-"'• rn•
.....
(..u.if.-1

~~

', ,'

c.io.H ..

g

--Ir.[- ~

... (~

.... _,"

~-o-1-1 ~

.

~

r_..11or11

I

"J

...

~

/oI1

l!i:li~o·......

OOOl!i:I ~""'

Ill

r-1

O®O

~r-..

~

~

lll'tl

"""°

........ ,:. .. ·!1Y11Z!l:'.1 ®~

Ootr

>1J

ji'

.,
I
II

""'"'w
........

_,,,_

Con, rul r.el

• m•

-~
::. (..

~

,J

iil
,...........
~

-

~

••,j>orj

=

...~

TiN

~

"""'

2:¢4:15 Ni

~

11t1!llr. O~ .

otr1~~

5>' B/00

000~ lltlJI

R;;tCJW (]!!]

....

080

~,.,......

lil
IJ) 4Ji""1

00ff

rut

jf......
'"""'

Figure 7-17. Shrunken 1-bit source (left: without dither; right: with .
dither)
CP-6 shows an 8-bit image drawn with (CP-6B) and without (CP-6C)
the dither flag set. While the difference between the images is not as
drastic as in the 1-bit case, the dithered version is clearly superior to
the nondithered version. In the dither case, the black is averaged with
the surrounding colors, producing an image that resembles the source
much more closely.
Setting the dither flag when shrinking only affects the way indexed
sources (1-, 2-, 4-, and 8-bit) are treated; direct sources are already
averaged when they are shrunk.

.,.. Depth Conversion and Dithering

347

Averaging when shrinking is considerably slower than shrinking
without setting the dither flag. You decide what the trade-off should
be: fast drawing with lower quality or higher-quality images that take
longer to render.
You will recall from the earlier section on depth conversion that the
dither flag has the same effect: Setting it produces a higher-quality
image but it takes longer to render. In that case, dithering affected
how the result is imaged into indexed destinations. In the case of
shrinking, the dither flag describes how the source should be treated.
This meaning of the dither flag in the transfer mode is the result of the
structure of the underlying code and the history of its development.
We agree that its operation is a bit bizarre.

Dithered Smoothing
In a previous section, we discussed the fact that images are stretched
via pixel replication. This can produce suboptimal results for noninteger
scaling since parts of the source image affect the result more than
other parts. This effect can be minimized, or even eliminated. The
procedure is simple, and the following outlines an example of dithered smoothing.
Suppose you want to scale an image by a factor of 1.5. If a Stretch
trap is called with a destination rectangle argument 1.5 times larger
than the source rectangle, every other line is replicated.
Ideally, every 1.5 scan lines would be replicated. Stretching in such a
manner is called subpixel stretching, since fractional parts of source
pixels are used to determine the color of each pixel in the result. While
QuickDraw does not provide a way to do this directly, you can
achieve the same result by first scaling the image up (by a factor of 3
in this case), and then shrinking it down with dither (by a factor of 2
in this case). The factor of 3 scaling produces an image where each
source scan line contributes to three lines in the result. The factor of 2
shrinking (with dithering) produces a result where two source scan
lines are averaged to produce one scan in the result. Thus, each line in
the final image is generated by%, or 1.5, scans of the source image, as
desired. Figure 7-18 shows the same image scaled up vertically by a
factor of 1.5 with and without subpixel stretching.

348

~

Chapter 7 Image Processing with QuickDraw

Figure 7-18. 1-bit image stretched by a factor of 1.5, with and
without subpixel stretching

.,... Dithered Patterns
Drawing shapes with a solid color directs the Color Manager to determine the closest available color before rendering the shape; if the
nearest available color is significantly different from the requested
one, then the shape's appearance will be appreciably different from
the intended one. To remedy this shortcoming, QuickDraw allows for
the creation and usage of dithered, RGB-relative patterns. Applications can use dithered patterns to approximate colors that aren't available on the destination graphics device. The MakeRGBPat() trap
creates a pattern that approximates a given RGBColor, and has the
following interface:
void MakeRGBPat(
PixPatHandle
RGBColor

thePixPat,
*targetRGB ) ;

IJJJ.

Using Deep PixMaps on Classic QuickDraw Machines

349

As with other PixPat traps, the pattern must be previously allocated
using NewPixPat(). The pattern generated by this trap will produce a
close match to the specified color at the time the shape is rendered. If
a change in the GDevice's color mapping occurs, then the pattern will
automatically compensate for it when the shape is rendered, without
having to recalculate it.
~

Using Deep PixMaps on Classic
QuickDraw Machines
A classic problem (no pun intended) that developers face is figuring
out which version of QuickDraw to develop for. Applications that run
on the Macintosh Classic family have a much greater potential market
but can't use the features of Color QuickDraw. The result is three
types of programs: Those that run on all machines but use only
Classic QuickDraw traps, those that run only on Color QuickDraw
machines, and those that run better on color machines but also do a
pretty good job on Classic QuickDraw machines. Obviously, it's most
desirable to fall into the last category.
For example, if you are writing a scanner application you need the
feature set of Color QuickDraw, but you would like it to run on a Classic
QuickDraw machine as well. While the job of reimplementing all of
Color QuickDraw for 68000-based machines is a formidable task (even
Apple has avoided it so far), there are some tricks you can use to get
acceptable results on Classic QuickDraw machines with a minimum of
effort.
One of the most common problems is displaying a PixMap on a
Classic QuickDraw machine, since there is no provision to deal with
anything other than BitMaps. Fortunately, there is one exception to
this rule: Classic QuickDraw can display pictures containing PixMaps
of depths up to 8 bits, and as of System 7.0, any depth. Thus, you can
construct a picture containing deeper PixMaps manually and then
display the picture using DrawPicture().

Note.,..

Pictures c;ontainihg~bad data ~ crash the Macintosh. An application must ensure that the pie~ it creates work on bbth Chlssic
and Color QuickDraw mad.ilites. It's essential that you llfiderstand
the picture format as described in Inside Macintosh, Volume V,
before attempting this technique,

350

~

Chapter 7 Image Processing with QuickDraw

A scanning application is an instance of when this technique might
be useful. This would allow a user to create color pictures using only a
black-and-white Macintosh. Obviously, the resulting scans cannot be
viewed in color, but a black-and-white rendition may be adequate
until the picture is exported to a paint program on a Color QuickDraw
machine. The DrawPicture() trap on Classic machines handles all the
color-to-monochrome translation for you.
Chapter 8 gives an example of creating a picture containing a PixMap.
You can use this routine (or a similar one) on a Classic QuickDraw
machine to display deep PixMaps using the DrawPicture() trap .

...,. The BitMapToRgn() Trap
The first release of 32-bit QuickDraw included the BitMapToRgn() trap.
This useful trap creates regions from BitMaps and 1-bit PixMaps, that
describe the area equal to the black pixel values in the source pixel
image. This capability can be quite useful for painting and other pixel
image editing applications. The interface to this trap is as follows:
OSErr BitMapToRgn(
BitMap
*sourceBitMap,
RgnHandle
destRgn ) ;

Using this trap is simple; however, a few rules have to be observed.
As with other traps that manipulate regions, the region must be a
valid region, preferably created via a call to NewRgn(). Secondly,
because of the size and complexity limitations on regions (as discussed in Chapter 2), the trap's return value should always be checked
to determine that the resulting region is in fact valid. Lastly, the
System 6 versions of this trap ca.n generate corrupted regions without
reporting the error if the destination region would be larger than 32K.
Listing 7-6 shows an example of using this trap to produce a region
equal in area to the pixels affected by text-drawing traps.
Listing 7-6. Example of using BitMapToRgn()
RgnHandle RegionFromText(
*theText,
char
long
textLen,
Re ct
*boundsR,
short font ID,
short fontSize,

.,.. The BitMapToRgn() Trap

short
short
BitMap
Graf Port
Graf Ptr
RgnHandle
OS Err

textStyles,
textJust )
offBits, savedBits;
portMem;
textPort, savedPort;
theRgn;
errStat;

/* check argument validity as much as possible */
if ((theText ==NULL) I I (textLen <= OL) I I
(boundsR ==NULL) I I EmptyRect( boundsR ))
return NULL;
/* create a BitMap to image the text into */
offBits.bounds = *boundsR;
errStat = BitMap_Create( &offBits ) ;
if (errStat != NULL)
return NULL;
/* create an offscreen port and install the BitMap */
GetPort( &savedPort );
textPort = &portMem;
OpenPort( textPort );
savedBits = thePort->portBits;
SetPortBits( &offBits ) ;
ClipRect( boundsR );

/* set up text parameters and render the text */
TextFont( fontID );
TextSize( fontSize ) ;
TextFace( textStyles );
TextBox( theText, textLen, boundsR, textJust );
/* (hopefully) derive a region from the text bit image */
theRgn = NewRgn();
errStat = BitMapToRegion( theRgn, &offBits ) ;
if (errStat != NULL)
{

DisposeRgn( theRgn ) ;
theRgn = NULL;

/* clean up */
SetPortBits( &savedBits ) ;
ClosePort( textPort );

351

352

~

Chapter 7 Image Processing with QuickDraw

SetPort( savedPort ) ;
BitMap_Dispose( &offBits ) ;
return theRgn ;

..,. Device Loops
A device loop is the code that performs some drawing operation for
all the screen devices the drawing intersects. For example, when Color
QuickDraw draws a rectangle on the screen, it first checks which
screen devices the rectangle will intersect. It then issues a drawing call
to each of the affected devices. There are two device loops internal to
QuickDraw (one for objects and one for PixMaps), and one that can be
used by applications. The application-accessible version is contained in
the DeviceLoopO trap and is available on all machines as of System 7.0.
It's important to understand that the DeviceLoop() trap is an exception to the QuickDraw graphics model where an application makes
drawing calls and QuickDraw determines how those calls will be
instantiated on the available hardware. Rather, DeviceLoop() provides a way for an application to determine how drawing will occur
to devices of different depths. The rationale for this is that you may
not be happy with the way QuickDraw maps an image to a particular
depth. For example, if you are drawing a picture that contains primarily shades of blue, QuickDraw may draw an entirely black rendition
(or a dithered version that is unacceptable to you) on a 1-bit device.
With DeviceLoop(), you can tell QuickDraw how to draw to each
destination depth.
Color plates CP-SA through CP-SD show four magnified versions of
the 32-bit QuickDraw icon. CP-SA is the icon displayed on an 8-bit
screen. This rendition is fine. CP-SB is the icon displayed on a 1-bit
screen. Because QuickDraw maps most of the colors in the icon to
white, the 1-bit rendition looks awful. CP-SC shows the desired 1-bit icon.
With the DeviceLoop() trap, an application can draw the 1-bit version
to 1-bit screens (and maybe 2- and 4-bit screens), and the 8-bit version
to the rest. Thus, if the icon spans an 8-bit and a 1-bit device, it will
appear as in CP-SD.
Note~

As of System 6.0.5, the PlotCicon() trap automatically does this for
icons. In System 7.0, an application can achieve the same results
with the DeviceLoop() trap.

.,.

~

Device Loops

353

The Deviceloop() Trap
The DeviceLoop() trap calls the drawing procedure for each active
screen device that intersects the drawing region. When the drawing
procedure is called, the current port's visRgn will be the intersection of
the original visRgn and the intersecting portions of the device.
The interface for this trap is as follows:
void DeviceLoop (
RgnHandle
ProcPtr
long
DeviceLoopFlags

drawingRgn ,
drawingProc ,
userData ,
flags ) ;

The drawing procedure is declared as:
pascal void DrawingProc(
short
depth ,
short
deviceFlags ,
GDHandle
targetGDH ,
long
userData ) ;

where the depth is the pixel size of the device and the flags are the
GDevice's gdFlags. The "userData" is the userData that was passed to
Device Loop().
-..-

Note.,..

Apple is striving to have a consistent calling interface across the
Macintosh product line. To this end, the DeviceLoop() trap is available on both the Classic and the Color QuickDraw machines. When
the drawing procedure is called on a non-Color QuickDraw machine, the "targetDevice" argument is set to NULL.

al
1r1

..n.

The "flags" argument passed to DeviceLoopO specifies how the
screen devices should be treated. You can select what constitutes
similar devices and whether or not similar devices should be grouped
together. Similar GDevices have:
• the same setting of the "gdDevType" bit in their gdFlags field
(monochrome I color),
• the same pixel depth, and
• optionally, the same color table seed.

354

.,.. Chapter 7 Image Processing with QuickDraw

When similar GDevices are grouped, the first one found is assumed
to be representative of the rest of the GDevices and is passed to the
supplied drawing routine as the "targetDevice" argument.
Setting the "singleDevices" flag directs DeviceLoop() not to group
similar GDevices. When this flag is set, the routine pointed to by
"drawingProc" will be called once for each GDevice that intersects the
"drawingRgn."
The "dontMatchSeeds" flag tells DeviceLoopO not to consider color
table seeds when comparing GDevices for similarity. This flag is ignored if the "singleDevices" flag is set.
Finally, by setting the "allDevices" flag, DeviceLoop() will ignore
"drawingRgn" and call the supplied drawing routine for all active screen
GDevices. In this case, the port's visRgn is not changed between calls
to "DrawingProc." Either the "singleDevices" or the "dontMatchSeeds"
flags can be used in conjunction with the "allDevices" flag .

..,. Using Deviceloop(): A Source Code Example
The purpose of the DeviceLoop() trap is to provide a way for applications to perform custom drawing to screens of different depths. For
example, suppose a paint application has a color wheel in one of its
windows. The color wheel is a 32-bit image stored in a picture. The
problem is that QuickDraw's rendition of the picture on 1-, 2-, and 4bit screens is less than ideal. DeviceLoop() provides an opportunity
for you to supply a custom picture if the color wheel intersects screens
of these depths. On 8-, 16-, and 32-bit screens, QuickDraw does an
adequate job with the 32-bit picture.
.
Listing 7-7 shows an example of how to use DeviceLoop() to implement the update procedure for such a window. Note that the size of the
window is fixed and is kept in the global variable "gColorWheelRect."
Listing 7-7. Deviceloop() example
void UpdateColorWheel(
RgnHandle
invalidRgn
BeginUpdate();
DeviceLoop(
invalidRgn,
0, 0 ) ;

EndUpdate();

(ProcPtr)&DrawColorWheel,

..,. Summary

355

The drawing routine might look something like the one shown in
Listing 7-8.
Listing 7-8. Deviceloop() custom drawing routine
pascal void DrawColorWheel(
short
depth,
short
deviceFlags,
GDHandle
targetGDH,
long
userData )
PicHandlemyColorWheel;
short resID;
resID = depth;
i f (depth > 4)

resID = 32;
myColorWheel = (PicHandle)GetResource( 'CLRW', resID );
if (myColorWheel != NULL)
DrawPicture( myColorWheel, &gColorWheelRect );

.,... Summary
The CopyBits() trap provides a simple mechanism for performing
standard image processing operations such as depth conversion, switching color spaces, image resizing, and colorizing. Furthermore, search
procedures provide an easy mechanism for extending color operations. For example, an application can employ search procedures to
perform color separations in a variety of colorspaces, cyan-magentayellow-key (CMYK, for example). The "key" is typically a binary or
monochrome black-and-white overlay image.
The CopyDeepMask() trap provided in System 7.0 extends QuickDraw' s image processing capabilities still further. CopyDeepMask()
provides great flexibility for combining images. While these traps need to
be supplemented if you want to develop a Hollywood-style special
effects program, they provide an excellent toolbox for basic image
manipulation.
The best way to perform custom image processing is to allocate an
offscreen GWorld and then operate on those pixels directly. You can
then use CopyBits() to transfer the image to the screen. For an even

356

~

Chapter 7 Image Processing with QuickDraw

higher degree of control for drawing to the screen, you can use the
DeviceLoop() trap to perform drawing operations in a manner specific to a destination pixel depth. While your application may prefer a
certain pixel depth over others, it should appear sensible and convey
meaning, regardless of pixel depths or color I grayscale mapping.

8

All About Pictures

Pictures and the PICT format have been part of QuickDraw since the
introduction of the Macintosh in 1984. The design goal of the original
picture implementation (now called PICT version 1) was that pictures
had to be compact. Due to the memory limitations of a 128K machine,
this format utilized I-byte opcodes, leaving little or no room for
expansion.
The introduction of the Macintosh II and Color QuickDraw necessitated the expansion of the PICT data format. Thus, the version 2 format
picture was introduced. This format facilitates future expansion and
has been extended several times with subsequent System software
releases.
When version 2 pictures were introduced, Classic QuickDraw was
revised so that these new pictures could be displayed on older machines.
While classic QuickDraw could display both version 1 and version 2
pictures, only version 1 (PICT) pictures could be created. Color QuickDraw, on the other hand, created a version 1 picture if the picture was
created in a monochrome GrafPort, and a version 2 picture if the
picture was created in a CGrafPort. In System 7.0, the OpenCPicture()
trap allows "Classic QuickDraw only" machines to create version 2
pictures. Regardless of how the picture was created or what version it
is, the DrawPicture() trap can be used to display it.
This chapter is all about pictures. It discusses how pictures are
created, how they can be analyzed using the new Picture Utilities, and
other advanced topics related to the use and handling of pictures.

357

358

..,. Chapter 8 All About Pictures

This chapter also includes code for creating a picture that contains a
deep PixMap manually (without the OpenPicture() trap). This is useful on Classic QuickDraw machines since it allows PixMaps to be
displayed using DrawPicture().
~

Picture Analysis with the Picture Utilities
Chapter 2 introduced the standard QuickDraw method of data interchange, the picture, or PICT. That chapter described a picture as a container for almost any QuickDraw drawing commands, much as a
polygon is a container of line drawing commands. This section expands on that discussion and describes a set of traps, the Picture
Utilities, for analyzing pictures.
When a user imports a picture into an application, it can be treated
in a number of ways. Prior to System 7.0, the standard way was to
image the picture into a PixMap and treat it as pixel data. The problem with this approach is that you are forced to treat the picture as a
black box and can only guess its contents. For example, it's difficult to
determine what depth PixMap to image a picture into. If the PICT
contains only black-and-white data, a 1-bit deep PixMap will do; if it
contains a color scan, a 32-bit PixMap may be required.
The alternative is to examine a picture's contents before rendering it.
The problem with this approach is that it goes out of date as the PICT
format is updated, and it requires a substantial amount of supporting
code.
The Picture Utilities are a new set of routines in the System 7.0 versions
of Classic and Color QuickDraw. They provide a standard methodology
for picture content analyses, returning information about the number
and types of graphic objects (including text) contained in a picture.
The Picture Utilities also provide color analysis of pictures and
PixMaps. These tools provide applications with the capabilities necessary to accurately display graphic data imported from other applications and environments.
For example, an application could obtain a picture's font information, and if some of the fonts weren't available, the application could
query the user for a suitable substitute.
While all other QuickDraw routines are in memory at all times, the
Picture Utilities are implemented as a package, contained in the System code resource of type 'PACK' and ID #15. The 'PACK' resource
type is a code resource accessed by the System via the Package Manager. The Standard File routines also reside in a 'PACK' resource. The
Package Manager is described in Inside Macintosh, Volume I, and

.,. Picture Analysis with the Picture Utilities

359

provides a way to access disk-based System code. This is useful for
large routines that are not speed-critical. They are loaded when they
are called and are automatically purged if the memory is needed for
other processes .

.,... Taking Pictures, in Review
As described in Chapter 2, creating a picture is simple. The OpenPictureO
trap is called to initiate Picture recording, and ClosePictureO is called
to end recording. All QuickDraw trap calls that are processed through
the bottlenecks or that affect the state of the current port are saved
into the picture. The DrawPicture() trap is used to display the picture.
Pictures can also be saved to disk or exported to other applications,
indirectly via the Clipboard or directly using System 7's Edition,
High-Level Event, or Process managers.
Note""'

Picture recording is implemented via the QuickDraw bottleneck
procedures. The standard bottlenecks check if a picture is currently
"being recorded; if it is, then the parameters of the trap call are deposited into the open i:>icture.
Printing also relies on QuickDraw' s bottleneck mechanism. In this
case, the print drivers determine what to image by replacing the
bottlenecks with .a printing version. Two QuickDraw traps don't
pass through the bottlenecks. As a consequence, they cannot be
directly recorded into a picture, nor can they be directly printed.
In particular, the CopyMask() and CopyDeepMask() traps ai:en't
bottlenecked.
But what does "recording into a picture" mean? To answer this
question, we first have to look at what we are trying to accomplish
with a picture. The goal is to store drawing calls so that they can be
recreated later. As earlier chapters have shown, drawing depends on a
lot more than just the drawing trap calls invoked: The status of the
current port and the destination GDevice also affect drawing. So how
does a picture account for and store GrafPort (or CGrafPort) and
GDevice information?
While it's true that both the current port and the current GDevice
affect drawing, they do so in different ways. The port affects the
operation itself: The desired color, location, and pen mode of the
drawing are stored in the port. Thus, the state of the port must be

360

IJJJ.

Chapter 8

All About Pictures

restored after calling DrawPicture() to render a picture. QuickDraw
accomplishes this by assuming that the port starts in a standard state
and then records any changes to the port's state into the picture. Thus,
pictures store the tokenized commands necessary to recreate the environment and the trap calls that were made while the picture was
being recorded.
Important ..,.

GrafPort state information is critical for recreating the drawing
environment. GDevice information isn't.
The GDevice controls how drawing will be represented on the destination device. Since the destination is determined when the picture is
drawn, the GDevice information when the picture is created isn't
pertinent to the picture's data, and consequently, isn't stored in PICTs.
If a search procedure is attached to the GDevice (discussed in Chapter
3) to perform a darkening operation when the picture is recorded, the
darkening won't occur when the picture is played back unless the
target GDevice has the search procedure attached.

Important ..,.

A picture is essentially a list of QuickDraw calls and the arguments
to those calls. When a pictu e is played back (in other words,
drawn with a call to DrawPicture()), the environment that existed
when each call was recorded is recreated.
There are actually two different versions of t)\e PICT data format.
The PICT version 1 existed in the first version of QuickDraw. It
used 1-byte tokens, or pict opcodes, to represent each QuickDraw call.
Color QuickDraw introduced the PICT version 2 format, which
used the 2-byte opcodes described in Inside Macintosh, Volume V.
Realize tnat pictures of both versions can be saved in resources of
type 'PlCT'. Fortunately, QuickDraw can distinguish the two versions from each other and render either one. This fs possible be:
cause all pictures begin with a 1-byte version opcode that indicates
the opcoae format of the remaining picture data.
A version 2 picture can be created enly if opened in a CGra£Port.
Pictures created on color machines in a Gra£Port are version 1
pictures.

~

Picture Analysis with the Picture Utilities

361

One of the major advantages of Macintosh is compatibility, making
data interchange between Classic and Color QuickDraw critical. Thus,
although Classic QuickDraw could only create version 1 pictures, it
was updated to include the ability to display version 2 pictures.
Important~

At any point in time, current versions of Classic QuickDraw and
Color QuickDraW>'can display each other's PICT versions.
There was actually a brief period of time (after Color QuickDraw 1.0 was introduced and before System 7.0 was released)
that Classic QuickDraw could not display all Color QuickDraw
pictures. Specifically, pictures that contained 16-bit and 32-bit
data couldn't be displayed on Classic machines because Color
QuickDraw 1.0 wasn't released for Classic QuickDraw machines;
the next QuickDraw revision for Classic QuickDraw machines
did not come until System 7.0.
On System 6.0.5 for Color QuickDraw machines and System 7.0 for
Classic QuickDraw machines, a new picture trap, OpenCPicture(),
was added. This call is similar to OpenPicture(), except it stores
resolution information in the picture. Furthermore, it always creates
version 2 pictures, even on Classic QuickDraw machines.

~

Using the Picture Utilities
The Picture Utilities allow applications to profile a number of pictures
at one time. This is useful if you are displaying several pictures at the
same time. Using the Picture Utilities in this way is similar to using a
bank account: The account number data structure is called a Pictlnfo.
As with GWorlds, the PictlnfoID structure is considered private; the
fields are accessible only through Picture Utility traps. The Pictlnfo
data structure contains the actual data associated with the account; its
definition is shown in Listing 8-1.
Listing 8-1 . Pictlnfo data structure
typedef struct
{

short
l ong
PaletteHandle

version ;
uniqueCo l ors ;
thePalette ;

362

liJJ.

Chapter 8 All About Pictures

CTabHandle
Fixed
Fixed
short
Re ct
long
long
long
long
long
long
long
long
long
long
long
long
CommentSpecHandle
long
FontSpecHandle
Handle
long
long

theColorTable;
hRes;
vRes;
depth;
sourceRect;
textCount;
lineCount;
rectCount;
rRectCount;
ovalCount;
arcCount;
polyCount;
regionCount;
bitMapCount;
pixMapCount;
commentCount;
uniqueComments;
commentHandle;
uniqueFonts;
fontHandle;
fontNamesHandle;
reservedl;
reserved2;

Pictinfo, *PictinfoPtr, **PictinfoHandle;

A Picture account can be opened with NewPictlnfo(), make deposits
with RecordPictlnfo() or RecordPixMaplnfo(), request account balance information with RetrievePictlnfo(), and close the account with
DisposePictlnfo(); unfortunately, there is no way to withdraw money
from a Picture account.
NewPictlnfo() opens a Picture account. The trap is defined as:
OSErr NewPictinfo(
*pictinfoID,
PictinfoID
verb,
short
colorsRequested,
short
colorPickMethod,
short
short
version ) ;

The "verb" argument specifies the kind of information you are
interested in: font, comment, and/ or color. The "colorsRequested"
argument is the maximum number of colors to be requested with a
call to the RetrievePictlnfo() trap. Some color-sampling methods
(described in a following section) use this information to determine

~

Picture Analysis with the Picture Utilities

363

how much memory they need to allocate. In System 7.0, "colorPickMethod" can be one of three predefined types, or a resource ID (in the
range [128 .. 32767]) of a custom color-sampling method. The "version"
argument should be set to zero for the System 7.0 Picture Utilities.
The NewPictlnfo() trap returns a new PictlnfoID in the location
pointed to by the "pictlnfoID" argument. This is analogous to a bank
account number, and you must use this value anytime you access this
account, much like a File System refNum value.
There are two traps that allow information to be added into the
account: RecordPixMaplnfo() and RecordPictlnfo(). They are defined as:
OSErr RecordPixMapinfo(
PictinfoID
pictinfoID,
PixMapHandle thePixMapHdl ) ;
OSErr RecordPictinfo(
pictinfoID,
Pictinf oID
thePictHdl ) ;
PicHandle

The "pictlnfoID" argument is the account number returned by
NewPictlnfo() and the PixMapHandle or PicHandle is the reference to
the PixMap or picture that is being added. The information is added
to a Picture account each time one of these traps is called.
You can request the information about the current account balance
using the RetrievePictlnfoO trap. This trap can be made after each
item is added, or once after all recording is finished, depending on
your needs. The trap is defined as:
OSErr RetrievePictinfo(
PictinfoID
pictinfoID,
*thePictinfo,
Pict Info
colorsRequested ) ;
short

The results of this trap are returned in the "Pictlnfo" argument. The
"pictlnfoID" argument contains the account number returned by
NewPictlnfo(), as always. The "colorsRequested" argument is the
number of colors desired in the ColorTable or palette. This number
must be equal to or smaller than the value passed for the
"colorsRequested" argument to NewPictlnfo().
When an application no longer needs a Picture account, it should
close it using the DisposePictlnfo() trap, defined as:
OSErr DisposePictinfo(
PictinfoID
thePictinfoID );

364

~

Chapter 8 All About Pictures

This disposes of all the memory used by the Picture account. It
doesn't dispose of memory returned by calls to RetrievePictlnfo().
There are also two traps that open an account, record information
for one picture or PixMap, retrieve the requested values, and then
dispose of the account. One trap is for pictures, the other for PixMaps.
These are useful if you want to profile only one picture or PixMap.
They are defined as follows:
OSErr GetPixMapinfo(
PixMapHandle thePixMapHdl,
Pict Info
*thePictinfo,
verb,
short
colorsRequested,
short
colorPickMethod,
short
version ) ;
short
OSErr GetPictinfo(
PicHandle
thePictHdl,
*thePictinfo,
Pictinfo
verb,
short
colorsRequested,
short
colorPickMethod,
short
version ) ;
short

From the definitions you can see that the only difference between
the traps is that one takes a "PicHandle" argument while the other
takes a PixMapHandle argument. The arguments to these traps are the
same as the arguments with the same name used by the previously
described Picture Utilities traps.
~

Count of Basic QuickDraw Objects
The Picture Utilities always return information about the different
QuickDraw objects contained in a picture. For example, this information might be useful for a Draw-type application. You could determine whether the picture contains anything other than BitMaps and
PixMaps and then allocate memory for the objects and extract them
individually.
Getting information about the types of objects in a picture using the
Picture Utilities is easy. The routine shown in Listing 8-2 gets a
PictlnfoID from the Picture Utilities using the NewPictlnfo() trap.
Then it loads two pictures from resources and adds them to the
Picture account (using RecordPictlnfo()), retrieving cumulative picture information after loading each Picture (using RetrievePictlnfo()).

~

Picture Analysis with the Picture Utilities

365

The information is displayed using another routine (not shown
here) called PrintPictinfo(). This routine would display the contents of
the Pictlnfo structure in a manner deemed appropriate to the application, perhaps as fields in a simple dialog.
If an error occurs anywhere along the way, the code jumps to DisposPictlnfo() to clean up the memory allocated by the initial NewPictlnfo()
trap.
·
Finally, the PictinfoID is disposed of using the DisposPictlnfo()
trap. Note that the pictures themselves are not disposed of since they
come from resources and the memory is the property of the Resource
Manager. In a commercial application, the pictures would probably
come from disk or the Scrapbook, rather than a resource.
Listing 8-2. Determining numbers of picture-based objects
/*
** Display information from consecutively numbered
** PICT resources.
*I

OSErr PrintObjectCounts(
short
pictRsrcID l
PicHandle
Pict Info ID
Pict Info
OS Err

myPicHandle;
myPictinfoID;
myPictinfol, myPictinfoBoth;
errStat;

errStat = NewPictinfo( &myPictinfoID, 0, 0, 0, 0 );
if (errStat != noErr)
return errStat;
/* load Picture from designated resource */
myPicHandle = GetPicture( pictRsrcID );
if (myPicHandle == NULL)
{

/* failed -> exit */
errStat = resNotFound;
DisposPictinfo( myPictinfoID );
return errStat;

errStat = RecordPictinfo( myPictinfoID, myPicHandle );
if (errStat != noErr)

366

~

Chapter 8 All About Pictures

/* failed -> exit */
DisposPictinfo( myPictinfoID );
return errStat;

RetrievePictinfo( myPictinfoID, &myPictinfol, 0 );
PrintPictinfo( &myPictinfol, 10, 10 );
/* Do the next PICT resource */
myPicHandle = GetPicture( pictRsrcID + 1 );
errStat = RecordPictinfo( myPictinfoID, myPicHandle );
if (errStat != noErr)
{

/* failed -> exit */
DisposPictinfo( myPictinfoID );
return errstat;

RetrievePictinfo( myPictinfoID, &myPictinfoBoth, 0 );
PrintPictinfo( &myPictinfoBoth, 100, 10 );
DisposPictinfo( myPictinfoID );
return errStat;

lilli-

Color Analysis
Probably the most useful feature of the Picture Utilities is the ability to
determine the best set of colors for displaying a picture. For example,
if you are writing a scanner application that scans in images at 32 bits
per pixel but displays them as 8-bit images, you are faced with the
problem of determining which 256 colors to use to display the image.
Or, if the image spans several screens of varying characteristics, you
can use the Picture Utilities to get the best color set for each screen,
and then display the result using the DeviceLoop() trap (described in
Chapter 7).
There are many ways determine the best colors for a given image.
The Picture Utilities currently support two methods: Popular and
Median Cut. You can also choose the System method, which will
itself choose the best method available. Currently, it always selects the
Median Cut method, but that may change: If better color selection
methods are available in the future, the System method will choose
the best one available. If you are undecided about which method to
use, use the System method.

~

Picture Analysis with the Picture Utilities

367

Color Plates CP-7A through CP-7D show 32-bit source image rendered using the various Color pick methodologies. CP-7A shows the
original source image. CP-7B displays the image with the standard 16entry ColorTable. CP-7C displays the image with the 16 most popular
colors. CP-7D displays the image with the 16 colors generated using
the Median Cut method.
All images were drawn without dithering. It's important to understand that the colors returned by the Picture Utilities are generated by
statistics described in the following section; this doesn't imply that the
colors are guaranteed to make a picture look good on a GDevice with
a limited number of entries. For most pictures, the colors returned by
the Picture Utilities are a substantially closer match than the standard
16-entry ColorTable.
Popular

The popular method of color selection chooses the most frequently
occurring colors. The Picture Utilities accomplish this by producing a
histogram of color usage. When profiling a picture containing a single
indexed PixMap, the histogram is calculated to the resolution of the
PixMap's ColorTable. If the picture contains direct PixMaps or multiple indexed PixMaps, the histogram is calculated to the most significant 5 bits of each RGB component.
When a fixed number of colors is requested, the histogram is searched
for the colors most frequently used until the requested number of
colors is found. If more colors are requested than occur in the picture,
the remaining entries are filled with black.
Median Cut
The median cut method returns a well-distributed set of colors. The
Picture Utilities accomplish this by grouping all picture colors into the
smallest RGB box that holds them. The length of each side of the box
is determined by the distance between the smallest and largest color
value in that axis. For example, if the color with the largest red
component has a red value of 63488, and the color with the smallest
red component has a red value of zero, the length of the red side of
the RGB box is 63488 - 0, or 63488.
After the length of each side of the box is determined, the box is
split in two along the longest edge. The box is split so that half the
colors fall in each of the new boxes. This process is repeated, always
splitting along the longest edge of all the RGB boxes, until there are as
many boxes as there are colors requested.

368

~

Chapter 8 All About Pictures

Once the desired number of boxes is obtained, the average of all the
colors in each box is used to represent that box.
Listing 8-3 shows an example routine that sets the palette of the
frontmost window to the number of colors requested, using the selected pick method. Note that the "suppressBlackAndWhite" flag is
set since black and white are always available. For a 16-color display,
an application would call the AttachPaletteO routine with a "numColors"
argument value of 14.
Listing 8-3. Creating a palette using Picture Utilities
OSErr AttachPalette(
numColors,
short
myPicHandle,
PicHandle
method )
short
WindowPtr
PaletteHandle
PictinfoID
Pict Info
Pict Info
Re ct
OS Err

curFrontWindow;
oldPaletteHdl;
myPictinfoID;
myPictinfo;
myPictinfoBoth;
boundsR;
errStat;

/* test to make sure that there is a front window! */
curFrontWindow = FrontWindow();
if (curFrontWindow == NULL)
return (OSErr) (-1);
/* Palettes already have black and white entries,
/* so there is no need to return it */

*/

errStat =
NewPictinfo (
&myPictinfoID, returnPalette, numColors,
method I suppressBlackAndWhite, O ) ;
if (errStat != noErr)
return errStat;
errStat = RecordPictinfo( myPictinfoID, myPicHandle ) ;
if (errStat != noErr)
{

/* failed -> exit */
DisposPictinfo( myPictinfoID );
return errStat;

~

Picture Analysis with the Picture Utilities

369

RetrievePictinfo( rnyPictinfoID, &myPictinfo, numColors ) ;
/* Dispose of old palette */
oldPaletteHdl = GetPalette( curFrontWindow );
if (oldPaletteHdl != NULL)
DisposePalette( oldPaletteHdl ) ;
/* Attach new palette and get color updates */
SetPalette( curFrontWindow, myPictinfo.thePalette, TRUE);
boundsR = (**myPicHandle) .picFrame;
OffsetRect( &boundsR, -boundsR.left, -boundsR.top);
DrawPicture( myPicHandle, &boundsR ) ;
DisposPictinfo( myPictinfoID );
return errStat;

The palette returned by the Picture Utilities has tolerant entries with
a tolerance value of zero. See Chapter 4 and Inside Macintosh, Volume
VI, for more information about the Palette Manager.
Custom
The two standard color pick methods produce good results for a large
class of images. But there are certainly a number of other techniques
for color selection. The Picture Utilities allow you to write a custom
pick method, much as you can write your own 'WDEF' or 'MDEF'.
Custom pick methods are kept in resources of type 'CPMT' and have
resource ID numbers in the 128 to 32767 range, inclusive. To select a
custom method, simply pass the resource ID of the method you want
to use for "method" argument when calling the Picture Utilities.
Writing custom pick methods requires some knowledge of assembly
language. The following pick method is written in Think C, which
readily allows mixing assembly and C. Modifying this sample method
to meet your own needs should be straightforward. This example
returns the first n unique colors (defined by a globally accessible
value; in this case, a global variable "gColorCount") encountered in
the picture and is given for illustrative purposes; it is not generally
useful. The first thing in a 'CPMT' resource is the main entry point.
This routine will be called with a selector in register DO. Listing 8-4
defines the four possible messages.

370

IJJi>

Chapter 8 All About Pictures

Listing 8-4. PickColors selector values
typedef enum
{

InitColors
RecordColors
CalculateColors
KillColors

0,
1
2
3

PickColors_Selectors;

The Dispatch routine and the routines associated with the four
selector values have the following prototypes:
pascal void Dispatch( void);
pascal OSErr InitColors(
short
colorsRequested,
long
*dataRef,
short
*colorBankType ) ;
pascal OSErr RecordColors(
long
dataRef,
RGBColor
*colors,
unsigned long
colorCount,
long
*uniqueColorsPtr );
pascal OSErr CalculateColors(
long
dataRef,
short
colorsRequested,
short
*colorBankPtr,
ColorSpec
*resultPtr ) ;
pascal OSErr KillColors(
long
dataRef );

The Dispatch() routine is organized to maximize performance. Since
color recording is the most common message the color pick method
will receive, this is the first thing checked. The Dispatch() routine is
shown in Listing 8-5.

.,..

Picture Analysis with the Picture Utilities

371

Listing 8-5. Custom color pick dispatch routine
/* Dispatch() routine */
pascal void main( void )
{

asm {
cmpi.w
beq

#1, DO
recordColors

cmpi .w
beq

#2,DO
calcColors

move.w
beq

DO,DO
init

cmpi.w
beq

#3,DO
kill

The first message sent to the color pick method is Init, which is
associated with some InitColors() routines. This routine is responsible
for allocating memory the color method requires. Since code that
resides in a resource does not typically have its own AS world and
thus does not have global variables, the memory reference is passed
via the "dataRef" argument. All of the color pick method routines take
the dataRef as a parameter. In this example the memory is large
enough for "gColorsCount": colors+l. The extra entry is used to keep
a count of the number of colors in the RGBColor array.
The second task that the InitColors() routine must perform is to
return the type of color bank the pick method will use. There are two
default color banks, or you can specify a custom color bank. They are
specified by the values in Listing 8-6.
Listing 8-6. ColorBank values
typedef enum
{

ColorBankisCustom
ColorBankisExactAnd555
ColorBankis555
ColorBank_Types;

-1,
0,
=1

372

.,.. Chapter 8 All About Pictures

The "ColorBankls555" value indicates that the Picture Utilities should
keep a histogram of colors accurate to 5 bits each of red, green, and blue.
The "ColorBanklsExactAnd555" value indicates that the Picture Utilities should keep an exact color bank, unless either one of the following conditions is met:
• more than one indexed PixMap is being profiled, or
• a direct PixMap is being profiled.
If one of these two cases is true, the color bank is converted to a 5-5-5
histogram and the results are the same as if "ColorBankls555" were
selected.
If either "ColorBankls555" or "ColorBanklsExactAnd555" is specified, the Picture Utilities will record the colors and the 'CPMT' will not
be called with the "recordColors" message.
This sample color pick method simply records the first unique
gColorCount colors encountered. Thus, it uses a custom color bank.
Listing 8-7 shows an example InitColors() routine.
Listing 8-7. Example lnitColors() routine
/* application global value */
short
gColorCount;
pascal OSErr Init(
short colorsRequested,
long
*dataRef,
short *colorBankType
Handle cSpecHdl;
*colorBankType = ColorBankisCustom;
*dataRef
(long)O;
cSpecHdl
NewHandleClear(
sizeof(RGBColor) * (gColorCount + 1) );
errStat = MemError();
if (errStat != noErr)
return errStat;
/* first free index */
(*(RGBColor**)cSpecHdl) [OJ .red
*dataRef = (long)cSpecHdl;

1;

~

Picture Analysis with the Picture Utilities

373

return noErr;

Since this pick method uses a custom color bank, it needs a RecordColors() routine. This routine takes the following four arguments:
• data reference (which was determined by the Init routine),
• a pointer to an array of RGBColors,
• a count of colors in the RGBColor array, and
• a pointer to a long integer variable that will be used to hold the
number of unique colors.
Since the color banks used by the Picture Utilities are only accurate
to the most significant 5 bits each of RGB component, unique colors
are distinguished only to that resolution. With a custom color bank,
you can use whatever method you like to count the unique colors in
the picture or PixMap.
The RecordColors() routine is called for every pixel in the picture.
To minimize the effects of execution overhead, the Picture Utilities
passes an array of RGBColors to the RecordColors() routine. The number
of colors in the array is indicated by the value of the "colorCount"
argument.
Listing 8-8 shows an example of a RecordColors() routine. It compares each of the colors with the colors in the array to determine if it's
unique. The first "colorCount" unique colors are put in the myColors
array, which is pointed to by the "dataRef" argument.
Listing 8-8. Example RecordColors() routine
pascal OSErr RecordColors(
long
dataRef,
RGBColor
*colors,
unsigned long
colorCount,
long
*uniqueColorsPtr
RGBColor
RGBColor
unsigned long
short
Boolean

*myColors;
anRGB;
arrayindex;
index, i;
gotUniqueColor;

myColors
*(RGBColor**)dataRef;
index = myColors[OJ .red;

374

~

Chapter 8

All About Pictures

arrayindex = 0;
while (index <= COLOR_COUNT && arrayindex < colorCount)
{

gotUniqueColor = FALSE;
while (arrayindex < colorCount)
{

gotUniqueColor = TRUE;
anRGB = colors[arrayindex);
for (i=l; (i<=index) && gotUniqueColor; i++)
{

if ((anRGB.red == myColors[i) .red) &&
(anRGB.green == myColors[i) .green) &&
(anRGB.blue == myColors[i) .blue))
gotUniqueColor = FALSE;
if (gotUniqueColor)
break;
else
arrayindex++;

if (gotUniqueColor)
{

myColors[index) = colors[arrayindex);
index++;
(*uniqueColorsPtr) += l;
else
break;

myColors[OJ .red

index;

return noErr;

The Picture Utilities will call the CalcColors() routine to get the best
colors. The "dataRef" argument is the same as that returned by the
Init() routine; the "colorsRequested" argument specifies the number
of colors to return; the "colorBankPtr" argument is a pointer to the
color bank if the Picture Utilities kept the color bank; the "resultPtr"
argument contains the address of a 16-bit (short) integer variable
where the 'CPMT' should put the result.

~

Picture Analysis with the Picture Utilities

375

Listing 8-9 shows an example implementation of a custom histogram calculation method. The CalculateColors() routine returns the
unique colors stored in the color bank by the RecordColors() routine.
If less than the number of colors requested are stored in the color
bank, the extra entries are cleared to zero.
Listing 8-9. Example CalculateColorsO routine
pascal OSErr CalculateColors(
long
dataRef,
colorsRequested,
short
*colorBankPtr,
register short
*resultPtr )
register ColorSpec
register RGBColor
register short
short
short

**colors;
i;
maxValue;
colors Stored;

maxvalue
colorsRequested;
colors = (RGBColor**)dataRef;
colorsStored = (*colors) [OJ .red - 1;
if (colorsRequested > colorsStored)
maxValue = colorsStored;
for (i=O; i<maxValue; i++)
{

resultPtr[i] .rgb = (*colors) [i + 1];
resultPtr[i] .value = i;
/* fill in the great unwashed masses */
for (i=maxValue; i<colorsRequested; i++)
{

resultPtr[i] .rgb.red =
resultPtr[i] .rgb.green
resultPtr[i] .rgb.blue = O;
resultPtr[i] .value = i;
return noErr;

376

..,,. Chapter 8 All About Pictures

The KillColors() routine is called when the Picture Utilities are done
with the color pick method when the application calls DisposPictlnfo().
It's responsible for disposing of any memory that the color pick method
allocated. Listing 8-10 shows an example of a KillColorsO routine.
Listing 8- l 0. Example KillColors() routine
pascal OSErr KillColors(
long dataRef )
OS Err

errStat ;

errStat = noErr ;
if (dataRef ! = NULL)
DisposHandle( (Handle)dataRef ) ;
return errStat ;

Note~

The Picture Utilities keep a color bank accurate to 5 bits each of
RGB. The InverseTable on a standard indexed GDevice has a resolution of only 4 bits. This means that seven:-eighths of the colors returned by the Picture Utilities might be beyond the resolution of the
GDevice's InverseTable. You may need to change the InverseTable
resolution to 5 bits for optimal results, using the MakeITable() trap.

Using Deep PixMaps on Classic
QuickDraw Machines
A major deficiency of Classic QuickDraw is the ability to manipulate
deep PixMaps. Anyone who has attempted to develop an application
that runs on both Classic QuickDraw and Color QuickDraw machines
has run into this problem. While the ultimate solution (implementing
Color QuickDraw on 68000 machines) has not yet taken place, this
section presents a simple idea that can assist with displaying PixMaps
on Classic QuickDraw machines.
The idea is to take advantage of the fact that Classic QuickDraw can
display version 2 pictures. Thus, to display a PixMap on a Classic
QuickDraw machine, you simply need to create a picture that contains
the PixMap and then call DrawPicture(). The routine in Listing 8-11
creates a version 2 picture containing a given PixMap.

.,..

Using Deep PixMaps on Classic QuickDraw Machines

Listing 8- 11. CreatePICT20 routine
#define CLIPSIZE
#define PIXMAPRECSIZE
#define HEADERSIZE
#define MAXCOLORTABLESIZE

12
50
40
256*8+8

#define OPCODEMISCSIZE

2+8+8+2

/*
I*
/*
/*

size of 256 entry */
ColorTable */
opcode+srcRect+ */
dstRect+mode */

#define ENDOFPICTSIZE
2
#define PICSIZE \
PIXMAPRECSIZE + HEADERSIZE + MAXCOLORTABLESIZE + \
ENDOFPICTSIZE + OPCODEMISCSIZE + CLIPSIZE
PicHandle CreatePICT2(
PixMap
*srcBits,
Rect
*srcRect,
Rect
*dstRect,
short
mode )
PicHandle
long
short
short

thePictHdl;
curPictSize;
*picPtr, *ctPtr, *pixMapPtr;
myRowBytes, picPosition, iii;

/* determine rowbytes value with flag bits stripped */
myRowBytes = srcBits->rowBytes & Ox3fff;
/* allocate worst case memory scenario */
curPictSize =
PICSIZE + ((myRowBytes I 127) + 2 + rnyRowBytes)
* (srcBits->bounds.bottom - srcBits->bounds.top);
thePictHdl = (PicHandle)NewHandle( curPictSize ) ;
if (thePictHdl == NULL)
return NULL;
/* skip picSize and put out picFrame (10 bytes) */
picPtr = (short*) (((char*)*thePictHdl) + 2);
*picPtr++
srcRect->top;
*picPtr++
srcRect->left;
*picPtr++
srcRect->bottom;
srcRect->right;
*picPtr++
/* put out header (30 bytes), this could be done from a */
/* resource, or taken from an existing picture */
*picPtr++ = OxOOll; /* version opcode */

377

378

.,.. Chapter 8 All About Pictures

*picPtr++
*picPtr++

Ox02ff;
OxOCOO;

/* version nwnber */
/* header opcode */

/* the rest of the header is ignored, O it out */
for (iii=l2; iii>O; iii--)
*picPtr++ = O;
/* write out 24 bytes of 0 */
/* put out a clip region: containing a bounds rectangle */
/* and zero bytes of scan line data */
*picPtr++
OxOOOl;
*picPtr++
OxOOOA;
*picPtr++
srcBits->bounds.top;
*picPtr++
srcBits->bounds.left;
*picPtr++
srcBits->bounds.bottom;
*picPtr++
srcBits->bounds.right;
/* put out "packBitsRect" opcode: $0098 */
*picPtr++ = Ox0098;
/* put out PixMap */
*picPtr++
srcBits->rowBytes I Ox8000; /* always make */
/* PixMaps */
*picPtr++
srcBits->bounds.top;
/* emit bounds rect */
*picPtr++
srcBits->bounds.left;
*picPtr++
srcBits->bounds.bottom;
*picPtr++
srcBits->bounds.right;
*picPtr++
O;
/* version nwnber */
/* put out PixMap's data pack information */
if (myRowBytes < 8)
*picPtr++
l;
/* unpacked format */
else
*picPtr++
O;
I* standard format *I
*picPtr++
*picPtr++
*picPtr++
*picPtr++
*picPtr+·+
*picPtr++
*picPtr++

0;
O;
Ox0048;
O;
Ox0048;
O;
O;

/* packed size */
/* horizontal resolution: $0048 0000 */
/* vertical resolution: $0048 0000 */
/* pixel type: chunky */

I* these fields are different for BitMap/PixMap */
if ((srcBits->rowBytes & Ox8000) != 0)

/* do PixMap */

~

Using Deep PixMaps on Classic QuickDraw Machines

*picPtr++
*picPtr++
*picPtr++

379

srcBits->pixelSize; /* pixel size */
srcBits->cmpCount;
/* number of components */
/* size of each component */
srcBits->cmpSize;

else
/* do BitMap */
*picPtr++
1;
*picPtr++
1;
*picPtr++
1;

/* the remainder are the same */
*picPtr++
O;
*picPtr++
O;
*picPtr++
O;
*picPtr++
O;
O;
*picPtr++
O;
*picPtr++

/* pixel size */
/* number of components */
/* size of each component */

/* offset to next plane */
/* ColorTable */
I* reserved */

/* emit ColorTable */
if ((srcBits->rowBytes < 0) && (srcBits->pmTable !=NULL))
{

/* obtain pointer to ColorTable */
ctPtr = (short*}*(srcBits->pmTable);
*picPtr++
*picPtr++
*picPtr++

*ctPtr++;
*ctPtr++;
*ctPtr++;

iii = *ctPtr;
*picPtr++ = *ctPtr++;
for ( ; iii >= O; iii--)

/* copy ctSeed */
/* copy ctFlags */

/* copy ctSize */

{

/* put out all entries */
*ctPtr++;
*picPtr++
*ctPtr++;
*picPtr++
*ctPtr++;
*picPtr++
*ctPtr++;
*picPtr++

/* pixel value */
/* red */
!* green */
!* blue */

else
/* put out an empty ColorTable: 8 words of 0 *!
for (iii=8; iii>O; iii--)
*picPtr++ = O;

380

..,. Chapter 8 All About Pictures

/* put out srcrect, dstrect, and mode */
srcRect->top;
*picPtr++
*picPtr++
srcRect->left;
*picPtr++
srcRect->bottom;
*picPtr++
srcRect->right;
*picPtr++
*picPtr++
*picPtr++
*picPtr++

dstRect->top;
dstRect->left;
dstRect->bottom;
dstRect->right;

*picPtr++

mode;

I* put out PixData */
if (myRowBytes < 8)
{

/* no packing */
pixMapPtr = (short*) (srcBits->baseAddr);
iii =
(myRowBytes *
(srcBits->bounds.bottom - srcBits->bounds.top)) I 2;
for ( ; iii > O; iii--)
*picPtr++ = *pixMapPtr++;
else
{

/* use packbits to compress the data */
Ptr
srcPtr, dstPtr, packBuf, tempPicPtr;
short packedSize, jjj;
tempPicPtr = (char*)picPtr;
srcPtr = srcBits->baseAddr;
HLock( (Handle)thePictHdl );
packBuf = NewPtr( rnyRowBytes * 2 );
if (packBuf == NULL)
{

DisposHandle( thePictHdl ) ;
return NULL;

/* Must use only byte accesses to avoid */
/* address errors on machines with 68000 CPUs */
iii
srcBits->bounds.bottom - srcBits->bounds.top;
for ( ; iii > O; iii--)
dstPtr = packBuf;

~

Using Deep PixMaps on Classic QuickDraw Machines

PackMoreBits( &srcPtr, &dstPtr, myRowBytes ) ;
packedSize = (long)dstPtr - (long)packBuf;
if (packedSize < 250)
/* put a byte to the picture */
*tempPicPtr++ = (unsigned char}packedSize;
else
/* put a word to the picture */
*tempPicPtr++
(unsigned char) (packedSize >> 8);
*tempPicPtr++ = (unsigned char)packedSize;

/* put the packed data out */
dstPtr = packBuf;
for (jjj = packedSize; jjj > O; jjj--)
*tempPicPtr++ = *dstPtr++;
DisposPtr( packBuf ) ;
HUnlock( (Handle)thePictHdl ) ;
/* perform long alignment */
if ((long)tempPicPtr & (long)OxOOOl)
tempPicPtr++;
picPtr = (short *}tempPicPtr;

/* All done! Put out "end of picture" opcode: $DOFF */
*picPtr++ = OxOOFF;
/* resize handle down to the amount actually used */
curPictSize = (long)picPtr - (long)*thePictHdl;
SetHandleSize( thePictHdl, curPictSize ) ;
*((short*}*thePictHdl) = (short)curPictSize;
/* mission accomplished: return the pict to the caller */
return thePictHdl;

void PackMoreBits(
Ptr
*srcPtr,
Ptr
*dstPtr,
short myRowBytes
short

smallRowBytes, iii;

381

382

.,.. Chapter 8 All About Pictures

/* first do the odd (remainder) amount */
smallRowBytes = myRowBytes % 127;
for (iii = myRowBytes/127; iii >= 0; iii--)
{

PackBits( srcPtr, dstPtr, smallRowBytes ) ;
smallRowBytes = 127;

This routine has a calling interface similar to StdBits() except that it
doesn't take a region parameter and it returns a PicHandle. If your
application needs to use regions, you can modify the code to use the
"PickBitsRgn" opcode $99 and to put the region into the picture just
before the pixel data.
Another limitation is that this routine only accepts BitMaps and
PixMaps of depths 8-bits or less. For direct PixMaps you need to
modify the routine to use the "DirectPackBitsRect" opcode $009A and
change the packing as described in Inside Macintosh, Volume VI. If you
decide to do this, be sure to assign the baseAddr field - it's not used
for opcodes $0098 and $0099 - with value $000000FF. See Inside
Macintosh, Volume VI. Creating direct PixMaps to pass to the CreatePICT2()
routine is much easier than creating indexed PixMaps since you don't
need to generate a ColorTable. But Classic QuickDraw machines before System 7.0 can't display pictures containing direct PixMaps. And
that is why this approach was chosen here.
The first section of this routine makes a worst-case memory guess. It
assumes a worst-case packing scenario that can slightly increase the
picture size. This memory management strategy is used because it's
much faster to allocate a large Handle to begin with than to attempt to
continually adjust the size of a Handle that is too small. Furthermore,
it greatly simplifies the code that adds data to the picture since it
doesn't constantly have to check if there's enough space. A possible
negative side effect is that there might not be enough memory for the
requested block, although there is enough memory for the picture.
You could rewrite the code to make a different tradeoff if you wish.
Another improvement would be writing the PICT directly to disk. You
could then spool the picture from disk when playing it back as described in Inside Macintosh, Volume V. While this is slightly slower due
to disk access time, it uses only a minimal amount of memory.
The routine puts out the picture's picFrame next. The picPtr variable
is used to put data into the picture. The Picture's pie Size field, which is
the first word of the picture data, is skipped since the final size of the
picture is not known yet. It will be the last thing written to the picture.

~

Using Deep PixMaps on Classic QuickDraw Machines

383

In this case, the picFrame field is simply the srcRect passed to the
routine. When pictures are created via QuickDraw, the picFrame is
passed as an argument to OpenPicture(). Next the routine puts out a
standard PICT2 header as described in the Color QuickDraw chapter
of Inside Macintosh, Volume V, followed by a clipping region the size of
the bounds rectangle. Setting a clipping region avoids a bug in Classic
QuickDraw that prevents pictures from drawing in certain circumstances. Specifically, when a wide-open region is scaled or translated,
the region operations overflow and the resulting region is empty.
The PackBitsRect opcode, $0098, follows the clipping region. The
opcode is followed by the PixMap record. Note that the baseAddr field
is not stored in the picture for opcodes $0098 and $0099. For opcode
$009A and $009B (used for direct PixMaps) you must set the PixMap's
baseAddr field to $000000FF. This allows machines that are not aware
of the $009A and $009B opcodes to terminate picture playback, rather
than crash. These opcodes are further described in Inside Macintosh,
Volume VI. The CreatePICT20 routine can take either a BitMap or a
PixMap as the "srcBits" argument. If a BitMap is passed, it's added to
the picture data as though it were a 1-bit/pixel PixMap.
After the PixMap record and ColorTable are put to the picture, the
srcRect, dstRect, and transfer mode are put out. Like the PixMap,
these arguments are passed to CreatePICT2().
The next section of code puts out the actual PixMap data and
Handles packing. QuickDraw uses the PackBits() trap to pack each
scanline of pixel data when rowBytes is greater than eight. If the
rowBytes value is less than eight, the data is put into the picture
without packing. On Classic QuickDraw machines, the PackBits() trap
can only pack a maximum of 127 bytes at a time. The PackMoreBits()
routine takes care of larger packing runs by calling the standard
PackBits() trap multiple times. Packing in groups a maximum of 127
bytes in length is slightly less efficient than allowing arbitrarily sized
groups. The initial worst-case memory scenario takes this into account. Finally an EndOfPicture opcode, $00FF, is put to the picture.
The size of the picture is calculated, and the Handle is resized; the
Handle is always made smaller since the original allocation assumed
worst case.
Once the picture is created, it can be treated like any other picture: It
can be displayed using DrawPicture(), or saved to disk and displayed
in full color on a Color QuickDraw machine.
Generating the PixMap to pass to CreatePICT2() can be a little tricky
on Classic QuickDraw machines. The easiest way to do this is by
putting a generic PixMap in a resource and then modifying relevant

384

llll>

Chapter 8

All About Pictures

fields to meet your needs. The ColorTable can be handled in the same
fashion. Alternatively, the PixMap and ColorTable can be constructed
manually if desired.
One problem you will encounter is mapping colors to indices. Recall
that QuickDraw does this by using an inverse lookup table. Since
none of the inverse table functionality exists on Classic QuickDraw
machines, you're on your own. You may simply want to do an exhaustive search of the ColorTable for the closest match for each pixel. Slow,
but simple and functional.
If you are running on a System 7.0 version of Classic QuickDraw
you can use the Picture Utilities to help with the ColorTable construction. The previous section in this chapter as well as Inside Macintosh,
Volume VI, describes how to do this.
Or, if you are running System 7.0 you can create pictures with direct
PixMaps. Direct PixMaps are much easier to create since you don't
have to map colors back into a ColorTable.
This routine also provides a solid starting point for implementing a
version of CopyBits() which accepts any depth PixMap as the source
for Classic QuickDraw machines. You could patch StdBits() and look
at the depth of the source PixMap. If it is 1 bit, then the StdBits() trap
is called. If it's deeper than 1 bit, create a picture as just discussed;
draw the picture, and then throw the picture away.

..,. Summary
This chapter described many of the inner workings of pictures and
how to access the information contained within them, using the Picture Utilities package new to System 7.0. The Picture Utilities provide
an easy way to profile the contents of a picture. This makes it easier
for an application to intelligently deal with the contents of a picture.
Perhaps the most useful aspect of the Picture Utilities is that they will
return the best color set for displaying the picture. For example, if you
want to display a 32-bit PixMap on a 16-bit screen, the Picture Utilities
can give you the best palette to do so. There are two standard color
pick methods. If neither is suitable for your application, you can write
your own.
Finally, this chapter presented code for creating a picture containing
a deep PixMap. This allows an application to display PixMaps on
Classic QuickDraw machines using DrawPicture().

9

Compatibility and
Configuration Issues

One of the greatest virtues of commercial microcomputer architectures
is openness, that is, the ability to add or change components freely in
order to suit the user and/ or owner. Unfortunately, this virtue is
arguably the biggest headache for microcomputer applications developers. A launched application is thrust into an uncertain environment
whose features and services vary from machine to machine and may
have even been changed since the last time the application was
launched. In order to meet this challenge, applications must test for all
operating system services that aren't guaranteed to be present on
launch, and they must take appropriate action should those services
be absent or defective. As a developer, if you ignore Memory Manager
errors or if you access QuickDraw traps that are not present on the
current machine, a system error is the usual result. Failure to follow
such programming essentials should be considered unacceptable application behavior under virtually all circumstances.
Striving to meet the goal of wide-range compatibility can involve a
significant amount of additional special-case coding and careful structuring. You should consider both your programming resources and
market forces when making application compatibility decisions. What
percentage of the targeted users are running the required System
software configuration? How much development time is available?
What are the best case and worst case scenarios?

385

386

IJJI>

Chapter 9 Compatibility and Configuration Issues

...,. Hardware Configuration
Apple has sold upwards of ten different Macintosh CPU "boxes"
under the Macintosh name. When cross-combined with only the Apple
hardware options (hard disk drives, video cards, display monitors,
and so forth), the real number of different Macintosh hardware configurations is huge.
It's a tribute to Apple System Software that the details of a particular hardware configuration are almost completely transparent to the
application. For example, there are many different kinds of disk drives
that can be connected to the Macintosh - from 400K floppy disks to
magneto-optical disks with over 1 gigabyte of storage - but the
operating system manages the differences between these devices and
applications need deal only with a standard interface provided by (in
this case) the File Manager. The same is true for video cards and
monitors. Macintosh displays range in size from 512-by-342 monochrome to 1152-by-870 (or even larger) in 32-bit color. Fortunately
QuickDraw handles all of the device dependent aspects of drawing
and presents a standard graphics environment to the application.
It's important for applications to follow the well-behaved application rules described in the following section to reap the benefits of
device independence as Apple expands its System Software. If your
application is dependent on a new piece of hardware (such as a frame
grabber) for which there is no standard interface in the Toolbox, you
will need to write custom routines. This is what developers did in the
interim between the advent of 32-bit display cards and direct pixel
support in QuickDraw.
This scenario appears again and again. As of this writing, there is no
support in the Toolbox to support video overlay or frame grabbing,
yet these cards are becoming increasingly popular. To support such
special video modes, developers are currently forced to write their
own graphics routines. It's only a matter of time before Apple provides guidelines for producing such hardware and a standard software interface for dealing with the new capabilities.
Once these standard guidelines are published, it is important that
your application abides by them. Any rules your application breaks
increases the probability that it will not be compatible with a future
version of System Software.

~

llJii>

Hardware Configuration

387

The Well-Behaved Application
With respect to graphics, Apple has developed a set of behavioral
guidelines that describe the well-behaved application. The rules for
well-behaved applications aren't really that restrictive, and the benefits include not merely future compatibility, but also improved performance on systems with graphics acceleration hardware that
conforms to these guidelines.
The performance of QuickDraw graphics has enormous potential for
performance enhancement; a well-behaved application may be able to
realize a more than 100-fold improvement in its graphics-intensive
code over that of unaccelerated performance. The fundamental criterion is that performance improvements must be accessible to applications within the Macintosh graphics environment, and that they require
no additional programming beyond the techniques prescribed by the
well-behaved application guidelines described in this section.
There are two strategies that can be undertaken by a hardware
manufacturer to speed up Macintosh system graphics:
• Achieve faster execution cycle time by incorporating faster dedicated graphics processing units.
• Minimize NuBus traffic via cached data structures. When graphics data are transferred from application RAM to the video memory
resident on display cards, they travel across the NuBus. These
transfers are significantly slower than those in main memory. By
keeping up-to-date copies of large graphics data structures on the
video card itself, accelerators can realize significant performance
improvements.
From a software developer's perspective, hardware accelerators
shouldn't be a concern: Either the user's machine has the hardware or
it doesn't. Graphics hardware accelerators function in a transparent,
device-independent fashion if you follow the well-behaved application rules.
Accelerators achieve performance improvements to all applications
(for example, faster line and polygon drawing), by patching QuickDraw
traps when the system boots up. Additional graphics capabilities that
aren't standard in QuickDraw (for example, video frame capture or
specialized image processing operations) are implemented by defining new device driver calls. Of course, these features are accessible to
only those applications that "understand" them and have tested for
the presence of that specific hardware.

388

.,.. Chapter 9

Compatibility and Configuration Issues

The primary focus of Apple's "good behavior" guidelines is to
provide developers with rules that guarantee compatibility with accelerators and future versions of System Software. To allow accelerators
to maintain accurate, effective graphics data caching, applications
must carefully limit the direct modification of the following important
Graphics Toolbox data structures:
• GDevice
• GrafPort and CGrafPort
• ColorTable
• PixPat

If an application needs to modify one of these data structures, it can
inform the Graphics Toolbox via one of the appropriate traps listed
here:
• GDeviceChanged()
• PortChanged()
• CTabChanged()
• PixPatChanged()
Caching these data structures allows the Graphics Toolbox to maintain them on the display card itself, rather than having to copy them
across the NuBus for every graphics operation. Calling one of these
new "DataStructureChanged" traps directs the Graphics Toolbox to
reestablish consistency within the data structure and to update any
cache that the data structure may be residing in.
Apple has decreed direct data structure modifications, other than
these four data structures, as threatening to future compatibility. Fortunately, most cases where an application might consider direct data
structure modification can be addressed with a trap call. On two
different occasions, Apple has published a list of traps that should be
called in such circumstances, shown here in Listing 9-1. The first
section of code is from System 7.0 Beta2 CD and d e v e l o p magazine;
the second is from System 7.0 Beta2 CD; and the third is from de v e l op
magazine.

~

Hardware Configuration

389

Listing 9- 1. Well-behaved application traps
AddComp()
BackPat ()
ColorBit()
Del Search ()
HiliteColor()
OpColor()
PenPat ()
PortSize()
SetClip()
SetPortBits ()

AddSearch ( )
BackPixPat ()
CopyPixPat ()
ForeColor ( )
MakeRGBPat ()
PenMode()
PenPixPat ( )
RGBBackColor()
SetOrigin ()
SetPortPlx ()

BackColor ()
ClipRect ()
DelComp()
HidePen()
MovePortTo ()
PenNormal ( )
PenSize ()
RGBForeColor ( )
SetPenState ( )
ShowPen()

CharExtra ( )
Move()
SetCCursor ( )
SetCursor ( )
ShowCursor ()
TextFont()

GrafDevice ( )
MoveTo()
SetClientID ()
SetGDevice ()
SpaceExtra ( )
TextMode()

HideCursor ( )
Obscurecursor ( )
SetDeviceAttribute()
SetPort ()
TextFace()
TextSize()

PMgrDispatch
InitGDevice ()
DisposPixPat ( )
DrawPicture ()
Std.Line()
StdRgn()
StdOval ()
OpenRgn()
XorRgn()
UnionRgn()

GWorldDispatch
DisposGDevice ()
CopyBits ()
OpenPicture()
StdBits ()
StdArc()
StdPoly()
CopyRgn()
RectRgn()
OffsetRgn ()

CopyPixMap ()
OpenPoly()
StdText ()
StdRRect ()
StdRect ()
DiffRgn()
SectRgn()
InsetRgn()

If we examine these traps in terms of the data types that they
operate on, the list of traps transforms into a prescription for dealing
with Macintosh data structures. The data structures and the prescription are as follows:

• Gra£Ports, CGra£Ports, PixPats, ColorTables - Protected, but
accessible. Use the appropriate "Changed" trap after direct modifications are performed.
• GWorlds, Regions, Pictures, Palettes, Polygons - Absolutely
protected. Don't change them· in any way, except via the traps
provided.

390

..,. Chapter 9

Important ll>

Compatibility and Configuration Issues

These lists and guidelines also imply that applications which rely
on custom bottlenecks that don't call through to the standard
procs installed in onscreen (C)GrafPorts or Color GrafPorts cannot be accelerated.
We must also realize that there is a physical limit to the number of
data structures that can be cached at one time. Developers should
assume a "most recently used" caching strategy. The best way to
account for this in application code is to group drawing operations so
that operations within each GrafPort and GDevice are performed
together. Examples of good and bad technique are shown in Listing 9-2.
Listing 9-2. Efficient and inefficient graphics code
/ * global variables * /
/* previously assigned */
PicHandle
gBackgroundPict ;
Rect
gBasicR ;
void Doit_Good(
GWorldPtr
gwArray [ ],
gwCount )
short
GDHandle
Graf Ptr
Re ct
short

savedGDev ;
savedPort ;
pictBoundsR, currentR;
i' j ' k ;

GetGWorld( &savedGDev, &savedPort ) ;
pictBoundsR = (**gBackgroundPict ) . picFrame;
OffsetRect ( &pictBoundsR, -pictBoundsR. left , -pictBoundsR . top);
for (i=O ; i <gwCount ; i++)
{

SetGWorld( gwArray[i], NULL ) ;
/ * draw background picture * /
DrawPicture( gBackgroundPict , &pictBoundsR ) ;
/ * draw some lines * /
for (j=O; j<lO ; j++)

.,.. Hardware Configuration

391

MoveTo( j*lO + 30, j*lO + 30 );
Line ( 2 0, 10 ) ;

/* fill some rectangles */
currentR = gBasicR;
for (k=O; k<S; j++)
{

PaintRect( &currentR ) ;
OffsetRect( &currentR, 10, 10 );

SetGWorld( savedGDev, savedPort ) ;

void Doit_Bad( void )
GWorldPtr gwArray [] ,
gwCount )
short
GDHandle
Graf Ptr
Re ct
short

savedGDev;
savedPort;
pictBoundsR, currentR;
i, j' k;

GetGWorld( &savedGDev, &savedPort ) ;
pictBoundsR = (**gBackgroundPict) .picFrame;
OffsetRect ( &pictBoundsR, -pictBoundsR. left, -pictBoundsR. top ) ;
for (i=O; i<gwCount; i++)
{

SetGWorld( gwArray[i], NULL);
/* draw background picture */
DrawPicture( gBackgroundPict, &pictBoundsR ) ;

for (i=O; i<gwCount; i++)
SetGWorld( gwArray[i], NULL);
/* draw some lines */
for (j=D; j<lO; j++)
(

392

llJI>

Chapter 9

Compatibility and Configuration Issues

MoveTo( j*lO + 30, j*lO + 30 ) ;
Line( 20 , 10 ) ;

for (i=O ; i <gwCount; i++)
SetGWorld( gwArray[i] , NULL) ;
/ * fill some rectangles */
currentR = gBasicR ;
for (k=O ; k<S ; j++)
{

PaintRect( &currentR ) ;
OffsetRect( &currentR , 10 , 10 ) ;

SetGWorld( savedGDev , savedPort ) ;

To summarize, graphics-intensive applications should be able to
take maximum advantage of the available graphics hardware. This
advantage can be realized only when applications, System Software,
and graphics hardware cooperate with one another. Within the context
of this cooperation, applications are responsible for the maintenance
of graphics data structures. They shouldn't perform direct modifications to them, particularly when those modifications can be performed
by a trap. If such modifications are absolutely necessary, then the
application must inform the Graphics Toolbox. For the highest level of
Toolbox software and graphics hardware support and cooperation,
applications should group graphics operations by destination and
functionality.
Note~

There's always great demand for "faster" graphics; indeed, most
graphics-intensive applications and their users are the most direct
benefactors of advancing graphics technologies. It's important for
software developers to remember, however, that the best opportunities to improve graphics performance lie within the graphics
applications themselves. Minimizing pixel value recalculations
and onscreen drawing can improve the performance and appearance of a clunky application to a far greater degree than a $3000
graphics hardware hotrod kit!

~

Software Compatibility

393

...,. Software Compatibility
Apple has published guidelines on how to write applications that will
stay compatible with future System software and Macintosh family
hardware. These guidelines are essentially an open agreement
between Apple and its developers stating what actions developers
and Apple must undertake to maintain future compatibility. The guidelines aren't published collectively, but are available separately in a
number of Inside Macintosh chapters and Tech Notes. Many of the
guidelines pertinent to graphics programming don't specifically focus
on graphic issues; as a consequence, many graphics developers aren't
familiar with the guidelines and the rules that they prescribe.
In the course of graphic software component design, software developers should imagine the likely configuration of graphics hardware
that their user's systems will have. They should also be concerned
with the minimum configuration, not to mention illegal configurations. Accounting for ideal system configurations is perhaps a luxury,
but it is important to consider nonetheless.
This variety of display setups usually causes developers to react in a
number of ways. They create software that can run on:
• One system configuration only, but the application crashes or
behaves weirdly on most other systems - This scenario often
results when lone developers throw up their hands and say, "I
give up. So it'll only run on my system!"
• One configuration only, but it exits from other systems on initialization with a nice "Bye-bye, no can do!" alert - This scenario is essentially Case #1, except that the programmer has
learned how to use SysEnvirons() or Gestalt() to check for nominal System Software and hardware features.
• Many different systems, but the application causes other applications to visually degrade and behave strangely - The programmers have some nifty tricks up their sleeves, but their
applications prefer to take direct control of display GDevices.
• Every known configuration and a few impossible ones (such as
a 512K machine with a 68882 math chip) to boot - The software
team implemented graphics-intens.ive routines to support 1-, 2-,
4-, 8-, 16-, and 32-bit depths and they developed color-matching
strategies to make 32-bit images appear almost realistic on monochrome machines. The drawback: The application took forever to
write, ran as slow as molasses, and took up over 2000K on disk.

394

~

Chapter 9 Compatibility and Configuration Issues

The point here is that most applications need to meet some basic
goals. They need to:
• Look really good on an ideal system - A 24-bit scanning application looks best on a high-resolution display driven by a 24-bit
video controller.
• Look pretty good on most systems-If graphics aren't a major part
of a program, then it should be easy to use QuickDraw techniques
that require a minimum of colors in the most flexible way.
• Exit gracefully on some systems - Maybe a floral-arrangement
design application doesn't need to work on a Macintosh Plus or a
Classic ...
Developers strive for the most direct means to meet these goals,
while at the same time avoid implementing parallel versions of individual graphics algorithms.
~

Detecting and Handling Limited System Software
One of the difficulties involved with Macintosh applications development is handling the wide range of System software configurations
that an application can encounter. It's desirable to develop applications that can run under the largest number of reasonable System
software configurations. We say "reasonable" because there are people
out there who are still running System 3.3 and Finder 4.2, and there's
no way that a color application is going to operate under that configuration short of implementing its own version of Color QuickDraw.
There is also a large number of systems out there on which users have
loaded numerous INITs and perhaps even some viruses that may
prevent applications from behaving properly or in a manner that
makes the danger undetectable to applications.

No Color or 32-bit QuickDraw
A lack of Color QuickDraw is typically intolerable for graphics-intensive
applications. This means that such applications won't run on any
machine in the current Macintosh Classic family. You should consider
whether your application is truly graphics-intensive before you decide to turn your back on this large installed base. If it can make do
with eight colors, you may consider selecting colors using the Classic
color model discussed in Chapter 3. An example of such testing is
shown in Listing 9-3.

Ill>

Software Compatibility

395

Listing 9-3. Drawing under black-and-white and Color QuickDraw
#define PORT_IS_COLOR(A) \
((((CGrafPtr) (A) )->portVersion & OxCOOO)

OxCOOO)

void SafeDrawingRoutine( void )
{

RGBColor
Re ct
Boolean

curPenRGB;
boxR;
isColorPort;

/* determine whether the current port is */
/* a CGrafPort or GrafPort */

isColorPort = PORT_IS_COLOR( thePort ) ;
i f (isColorPort)
{

/* set a cyan pen color */
curPenRGB.red = OxOOOO;
curPenRGB.green = OxFFFF;
curPenRGB.red = OxFFFF;
RGBForeColor( &curPenRGB ) ;

else
/* set a cyan pen color, use a pen pattern to */
/* distinguish it further from solid black and white */

ForeColor( cyanColor ) ;
PenPat( ltGray ) ;

/* draw using traps available to all QuickDraw versions */
SetRect( &boxR, 0, 0, 40, 40 );
OffsetRect( &boxR, 80, 30 );
FillRect( &boxR );

Notice the use of the pen pattern in the black-and-white condition in
this code fragment. You can often achieve adequate results when the
display's pixel depth is less than ideal.
Using 32-bit QuickDraw is another matter; its reliance on 68020 code
means that Apple isn't likely to develop a version that runs on 68000
CPUs. The tendency is for applications that are graphics-intensive to
require 32-bit QuickDraw in order to run. If the application requires
the Direct color model, then it requires 32-bit QuickDraw and must
test for it on startup.

396

~

Chapter 9 Compatibility and Configuration Issues

Old System Software

This is a more general version of the 32-bit QuickDraw present condition, except that in addition to QuickDraw, the developer has to
consider whether the functionality of the trap patches found in a
particular system service are adequate. Some of the more important
features that have changed over minor System Software releases include the following:
• Color and grayscale printing require LaserWriter 6.0, which in
turn requires System 6.0.3.
• The Palette Manager has had a number of significant enhancements up through version 6.0.5. In particular, the Palette Manager
from Systems 6.0.3 and earlier wouldn't always release entries
back to the System, even after the owning application quits .

..,.. Imposing Configuration Requirements
In the final analysis, you may conclude that there are certain software
and hardware resources that your application requires and others that
are desirable but whose absence can be tolerated.
Minimum RAM

An applications developer should determine as accurately as possible
the recommended and minimum heap size necessary for the application to operate meaningfully and set the values in the 'SIZE' resources
numbered 0 (recommended size) and -1 (minimum size). In particular, the maximum and minimum number of offscreen image buffers
should be accounted for in these size requirements because they are
by far the largest consumers of heap memory. The main stumbling
block here is that this number changes drastically for different pixel
depths. For example, imagine an application with two to eight offscreen
image buffers, each with dimensions of 512 pixels wide by 512 tall
(see Table 9-1).
Table 9-1. Heap memory requirements

2 buffers
8 buffers

4 bits per pixel
256K
IM

8 bits per pixel
512K
2M

32 bits per pixel
2M
BM

.,. 32-Bit Addressing Issues

397

As you can see, such an application could perform well under most
circumstances with a heap size of 2 megabytes. If the user wanted to
work with 32-bit images, the application should probably instruct the
user to set the size resource directly, via the entry in the application
file's Finder Get Info window. The Finder's About ... memory status
dialog can be used to verify these memory usage calculations.
Minimum System Software
As stated earlier, Apple considers it perfectly acceptable to check for
and, if necessary, require the user to install a system version greater
than or equal to the one that the application deems necessary for
survival. This has the added benefit of encouraging users to keep their
System Software current.
Monitor Configurations
Applications (with the possible exception of palette animators) should
never require the user to set a particular pixel depth, and they should
never use SetDepth() to change display depths without the user's
explicit permission to do so. In the past, when GDevices weren't well
understood and GWorlds weren't available, a number of graphics
applications commandeered the current GDevice (usually the main
GDevice) and changed its characteristics to suit its needs. There is no
longer any excuse for that kind of hardware control strategy. Create a
GWorld if your application requires precise graphics environment
control. Don't directly mess with public display GDevices. Enough said.
~

32-Bit Addressing Issues
The Macintosh runs in two modes, 24 bit and 32 bit. In 24-bit mode
only 24 address bits are used, while in 32-bit mode all 32-bit address
bits are used. Thus, in 32-bit mode, the address space is 256 times
larger than it is in 24-bit mode.
The problem is that the memory map changes considerably between
the two modes, and the Toolbox must know which addressing mode
its parameters are in. For compatibility reasons, the assumption is that
calls to all Toolbox traps are made in the mode the Macintosh started
up in and that addresses passed into Toolbox traps are valid in that
addressing mode.
One difficulty with this technique is that if the Macintosh was
booted in 24-bit mode the base addresses of PixMaps can be in only

398

~

Chapter 9

Compatibility and Configuration Issues

24-bit space, while video cards may require 32-bit addressing to access
all of their memory. As a result, there are several memory-addressing
environments that QuickDraw must deal with.

• If the base address is the same as the QuickDraw application
global variable "scrnBase," which it will be for all onscreen ports
and PixMaps, the base address is assumed to be 32 bit. 32-bit
QuickDraw and later versions always enter 32-bit mode before
drawing to the screen.
• Any other base address is assumed to be valid in the processor
mode on boot unless Bit 2 of a PixMap' s pm Version field is set. If
that bit is set, then the address is 32 bit and QuickDraw will enter
32-bit mode before accessing the pixel-image memory pointed to
by the PixMap's baseAddr field.
The offscreen GWorld traps also use the pm Version field to keep state
information about the baseAddr for internal use. Thus, the application
should set bit 2 pmVersion only for those PixMaps that it creates.
Applications should never change the pmVersion value for a PixMap
belonging to an offscreen GWorld.
IJJJ.

A Short History
The 68000 memory addressing architecture used in the Classic Macintosh
family maintains a 32-bit address internal to the processor but has
only 24 physical address lines actually connected to motherboard
RAM. These 24 lines can address a range from $0 to $00FFFFFF. To
conserve memory, many older Toolbox traps (mostly those described
in Inside Macintosh, Volumes I, II, and III) use the high byte of the
address to keep additional information.
Later processors in the 68000 family use all 32 processor address lines.
This gives the processor an address range from $0 to $FFFFFFFF hexadecimal. The A/UX operating system was the first environment that
required Macintosh applications to be 32-bit clean. For the A/UX release,
the portions of the Toolbox that use the high byte of the address were
revised. Unfortunately, some applications assumed they could still use
the high byte of the address. These applications don't run under A/UX.
In System ~.O, the user can use the Memory Control Panel Device
(cdev) to set whether 24-bit (which uses the 24-bit Memory Manager)
or 32-bit (which uses a 32-bit clean Memory Manager) addressing
mode should be used. Users with more than 8 megabytes of RAM
need to use 32-bit addressing mode.

..,. 32-Bit Addressing Issues

399

...,. Addressing Video Display Memory
As if the existence of two different addressing modes doesn't complicate matters enough, it turns out that slot space, where video memory
usually resides, sometimes requires 32-bit addressing.
This information can be extracted from the video cards associated
with GDevice driver, in the manner shown in Listing 9-4.
Listing 9-4. Determining a video card's slot number
unsigned short GDev_GetSlotID(
GDHandle
theGDev )
AuxDCEHandle
short
if (theGDev

theDrvrHdl;
slotNum;
!=

NULL)

{

theDrvrHdl =
(AuxDCEHandle)GetDCtlEntry( (**theGDevJ .gdRefNum );
if (theDrvrHdl != NULL)
return (**theDrvrHdl) .dCtlSlot;

return OxOOOO;

In 24-bit addressing mode, slot space ranges from $900000 to $EFFFFF,
with one megabyte per slot. Valid 24-bit addresses are within the
range $s00000 to $sFFFFF, where "s" is a valid slot number: $9 to $E
hexadecimal.
In 32-bit addressing mode, slot space ranges from $F9000000 to
$FEFFFFFF, with 16 addressable megabytes per slot; in this mode,
valid slot addresses range between $Fs000000 and $FsFFFFFF, where
"s" is a valid slot number.
However, there is also what's known as super slot space. The super
slot space is accessible only in 32-bit addressing mode and ranges
from $90000000 to $EFFFFFFF, with 256 megabytes per slot: valid slot
addresses range between $s0000000 to $sFFFFFFF, where "s" is a valid
slot number.
When 32-bit QuickDraw (or System 7.0) is not around, 24-bit slot
space is used (old QuickDraw always accesses the screen in 24-bit
addressing mode). However, 24-bit slot space doesn't permit access to

400

IJJ>-

Chapter 9

Compatibility and Configuration Issues

more than 1 megabyte of video memory, preventing the support of 32
bits per pixel. So 32-bit QuickDraw always accesses the screen in 32bit addressing mode, using either the 32-bit slot space or the super
slot space base address as defined by the video display card ROM's
initialization code.
For example, the original Macintosh High-Resolution Video Card
uses 24-bit slot space, with a slot base address of $Fss00000. In 24-bit
addressing mode, the stripped address is $s00000, which maps to slot
"s" in 24-bit slot space. But that address still works with.32-bit QuickDraw because $Fss00000, if used in 32-bit addressing mode, happens
to map into 32-bit slot space as well.
The 8•24 card uses $Fss00000 (24-bit slot space) when 32-bit QuickDraw isn't installed, in which case 32-bit-per-pixel mode is not available, and $Fs000000 (super slot space) when 32-bit QuickDraw is
available.
When an address is passed to a QuickDraw trap, it's assumed to be
a valid 24-bit mode address. In order to pass a PixMap reference that
contains a 32-bit baseAddr value into CopyBits() or some other QuickDraw trap, an application must set bit 2 of the PixMap's pmVersion
field (pmVersion = 4) to inform the QuickDraw trap that the address is
a 32-bit address and not a 24-bit one .

..,.. Handling 32-Bit Addressing Mode
If you have read this far in this book, you are surely aware that your
application should never write directly to the screen. Thus, you might
think you never need to worry about whether you are in 32-bit mode
or not. This is true as long as your application is 32-bit clean, with one
exception.
The exception occurs when applications use the GWorld traps to
create a GWorld and then access the GWorld' s pixels directly. To get
the baseAddr of such a PixMap, applications must call GetPixBaseAddr()
rather than copying the embedded PixMap's baseAddr field value. This
trap returns an address that is valid only in 32-bit addressing mode.
This causes problems if the application tries to use the address in 24bit mode. The bug will not appear until the application encounters an
accelerator card which implements GWorlds on the card's memory
such as Apple's 8•24 GC card with a 2 MB DRAM upgrade kit.

..,. 32-Bit Addressing Issues

401

To avoid these problems, applications should use the following
strategy:
1. Call the GetPixBaseAddr() trap to get the PixMap's address valid

only in 32-bit addressing mode.
2. Switch to 32-bit addressing mode with the SwapMMUMode() trap.
3. Perform the intended task. You must call StripAddress() trap on
any singly dereferenced Handle (master pointer) value.
4. Call SwapMMUMode() to restore the previous addressing mode.
Furthermore, an application cannot make any other system calls
after it has switched to 32-bit mode since traps expect to be called in
whatever mode the Macintosh was started in. Applications that make
other trap calls after switching to 32-bit mode are likely to crash if the
machine was started in 24-bit mode. The routine in Listing 9-5 shows
how these calls should be used.
Listing 9-5. Using CopyBits() for colorizing
OSErr DoColorizedCopyBits( void )
Rect
Color Spec
RGBColor
GDHandle
GWorldPtr
PixMapHandle
OS Err
short
long
long
unsigned short
char

srcRect, dstRect;
savedFgColor;
coloredRGB;
oldGD;
oldGW, myOffGWorld;
myPixMapHandle;
errStat;
iii;
jjj;
*bitsPtr;
myRowBytes;
mmuMode;

SetRect( &srcRect, 0, 0, 1, 256 ) ;
errStat = NewGWorld( &myOffGWorld, 32, &srcRect, NULL, NULL, OL ) ;
if (errStat != noErr)
return errStat;
#ifdef _GET_GWPM_FIXED_
myPixMapHandle
GetGWorldPixMap( myOffGWorld ) ;
#else
myPixMapHandle
myOffGWorld->portPixMap;
#endif _GET_GWPM_FIXED_

402

IJll-

Chapter 9 Compatibility and Configuration Issues

/ * get baseAddr good in 32-bit mode */
LockPixels( my PixMapHandle ) ;
bitsPtr = (long*)GetPixBaseAddr( myPixMapHandle ) ;
myRowBytes = (**myPixMapHandle) .rowBytes & Ox3fff ;
/ * switch to 32-bit addressing mode to access pixel values */
/* mmuMode contains previous mode */
mmuMode = true32b ;
SwapMMUMode ( &mmuMode ) ;
for (jjj = 256-1 ; jjj >= O; jjj--)
{

*bitsPtr = jjj I (jjj « 8) I (jjj «16) ;
bitsPtr = (long*) ((char *)bitsPtr + myRowBytes);

/ * switch back to previous addressing mode: 24- or 32-bit */
SwapMMUMode ( &mmuMode ) ;
SaveFore( &savedFgColor ) ;
coloredRGB.red = OxFFFF;
coloredRGB . green = O;
coloredRGB . blue = O;
RGBForeColor ( &co loredRGB ) ;
CopyBits(
*myPixMapHandle, &(thePort->portBits) ,
&srcRect , &(thePort- >portRect), srcCopy, NULL) ;
RestoreFore( &savedFgColor ) ;
UnlockPixels( myPixMapHandle ) ;
DisposGWorld( myOffGWorld ) ;
return errStat;

Important~

~

~

Other Issues

403

Other Issues
There are a number of other small but significant facts that graphics
developers might want to consider when designing the software architecture of their next smash application:
• Don't overload the Memory Manager - The performance of
software that relies on a large number of small, dynamically
allocated data objects can degrade significantly when its heap
becomes full. The penalty is usually paid by the application when
it tries to allocate large relocatable blocks or make the existing
one larger.
This has a number of implications for graphics applications design, especially when object-oriented software methodologies are
employed. Many object-oriented development systems provide
Handle-based support for individual objects.
• Get others to test your work during development - The only
way to guarantee any degree of functionality across most of the
Macintosh family is to test your software regularly and thoroughly on many different configurations. While it's unfortunate
that it's so easy to write software that performs differently under
even slightly differing configurations, denying this fact only leads
to rude awakenings near project's end - even the most experienced Macintosh programming teams can become afflicted with
compatibility shock. Begin the testing phase of software development as soon as possible so that you and your team can find and
correct incompatible implementations.
• Make the application fit the user - Consistent with the Macintosh spirit is the idea that the best applications are designed and
developed by people who understand their customers and appreciate those customers' needs and desires. Graphics-intensive applications get the most "oohs" and "ahhs" - people expect a
bigger bang out of 3-D rendering and animation programs than
they do out of word processors and spreadsheets, despite all
advertising to the contrary. Computer graphics users tend to
place a higher value on aesthetic components than do business
computer users. A powerful interface is more important to a
radically new visualization tool than it is to familiar tools such as
databases and calculators. This doesn't mean that you need to go
crazy with ornamentation: showy color, pop-up controls, and
animation effects don't constitute a solid user interface, they merely
augment one. Do your interface homework.

404

~

Chapter 9 Compatibility and Configuration Issues

Developing applications that will maintain their functionality over
the numerous Macintosh configurations is a daunting task, but the
rewards to the customer are numerous. Most important, customers
should not encounter problems because they are running on configurations that differ from the developer's. A second developer mandate
is to hold support questions and maintenance releases to a minimum .

..,. Summary
This chapter presented a number of guidelines that Apple has put
forth in order to help developers solve compatibility problems and
deal with related issues effectively. The primary issues covered were
determining reliance on System Software and display hardware, accessing system graphics data structures properly, and handling the
differences between 24-bit and 32-bit addressing modes.

Bibliography

Graphics-intensive programming requires an understanding of a number of computer disciplines. In addition, many non-computer approaches to visual presentation can provide other insights into
computational graphics. Here are a few of our favorite books on
graphics and related topics .

..,.. Graphics
Foley, James and van Dam, Andries 1990. Fundamentals of Interactive
Computer Graphics, Second Edition. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley
Publishing Company. This book is one of the few good "standard"
computer graphics textbooks and one of the most comprehensive
overviews of fundamental computer graphics concepts. Presentation
is well balanced, including "Pascal-ish" source code examples, illustrations, and mathematical formulas.
Gonzales, Rafael and Wintz, Paul 1987. Digital Image Processing, Second Edition. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. This
textbook covers most of the fundamental techniques associated with
pixel-based image collection and processing. Emphasis is on signal
processing from a mathematic perspective; many readers may find it
slow going.
Wolberg, George 1990. Digital Image Warping. IEEE Computer Society
Press. A strong, thorough investigation into the craft of distorting
pixel images. It strikes a good balance between mathematics, code
samples, and color plates.
405

406

~

Bibliography

Vince, John 1990. The Language of Computer Graphics. Van Norstrand
Reinhold. A reasonably comprehensive of computer graphics terminology.
Glassner, Andrew S. 1989. JD Computer Graphics: A User's Guide for
Artists and Designers. Design Press. A thorough, yet plain-language
look at the world of computer graphics. Although this book is targeted for non-technical people, most programmers will find it technically substantial.
Friedhoff, Richard Mark and Benzon, William 1989. Visualization: The
Second Computer Revolution. Abrams. An excellent technically oriented
survey of intermediate and advanced computer imaging techniques.
Descriptions of terminology and usage of examples is outstanding.
Chock full of lovely color plates.
Rivlin, Robert 1986. The Algorithmic Image: Graphic Visions of the Computer Age. Bellevue, WA: Microsoft Press. Another good image-rendering survey. Clear description of image processing algorithms, along
with numerous helpful graphics and color plate examples. Solid historical perspective, too .

..,,. Object Programming
Stroustrup, Bjarne 1987. The C++ Programming Language. Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. The first chapter presents a
number of design objectives for which C++ was designed, which
should be of interest to OOPS programmers.
Wilson, David A. 1990. Programming with MacApp. Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. A clear description of MacApp
and its design objectives is presented. Good discussion of the issues
surrounding views and view hierarchies .

..,,. Text Programming
Knuth, Donald E. 1986. The MetaFont Book: Computers and Typesetting.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. THE standard
text for text computation discussion.
Adobe Systems, Inc., 1991. Postscript Language Reference Manual, Second Edition. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. If
you're into printing, this book is a must. Even if you're not, it's rich in
rendering theory and technique.
Nelson, Ted 1981. Literary Machines, Second Edition. Xanadu Press. An
alternative, irreverent, thoroughly enjoyable look at text and information processing. Read it if you can find it.

lilJJ.

~

Bibliography

407

Applied Graphics
Nelson, Ted 1974 (revised 1987). Computer Lib/Dream Machines. Tempus/
Microsoft Press. A searching, yet mirthful look into the past and future of
computing. Nelson's unique mix-and-match multimedia approach
makes the serious business of analyzing the use of computers seem
like a hayride.
Ambron, Susan and Hooper, Kristina, Editors 1988. Interactive Multimedia. Apple/Microsoft Press.
Laurel, Brenda, Editor 1990. The Art of Human-Computer Interface Design.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. A good survey
of the issues surrounding software interface design.
Tufte, Edward R. 1983. The Visual Display of Quantitative Information.
Graphics Press. A detailed and enjoyable investigation into the art and
craft of displaying graphics-oriented data creatively and expressively.

~

Reference
Tech Notes, Macintosh Developer Technical Support, Apple Computer, Inc.
Required Reading

#120: Drawing into an Offscreen Pixel Map
#163: Adding Color with CopyBits()
#211: Palette Manager Changes in System 6.0.2
#276: Of Time, Space and CopyBits()
Useful Reading

#181: Every PicComment Tells a Story, Don't It?
#277: Gimme Depth or Death

Inside Macintosh, Volume I, Apple Computer, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company
Required Reading

QuickDraw
Window Manager
Useful Reading

Font Manager

Inside Macintosh, Volume IV, Apple Computer, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company

408

.,.. Bibliography

Useful Reading

Font Manager

Inside Macintosh, Volume V, Apple Computer, Addison-Wesley Pub-

lishing Company
Required Reading

Color QuickDraw
Graphics Devices
Color Manager
Palette Manager
Color Picker Package
Useful Reading

Window Manager
Menu Manager
Control Manager
Dialog Manager

Inside Macintosh, Volume VI, Apple Computer, Addison-Wesley Pub-

lishing Company
Required Reading

Graphics Overview
Color QuickDraw
Palette Manager
Graphics Devices Manager
Memory Management
Useful Reading

User Interface Guidelines
Font Manager
Picture Utilities Package
Color Picker Package

Designing Cards and Drivers for the Macintosh Family, Second Edition
Apple Computer, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company
Standard Apple Numerics Manual, Second Edition Apple Computer,
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. This is the only place where
the Standard Apple Numerics Environment (SANE) is discussed in
any detail. It's also a pretty decent reference to basic computer number theory.
32-bit QuickDraw Technical Reference, Apple Computer, Apple
Programmer's and Developer's Association (APDA)

.,. Bibliography

~

409

Magazines
Mac Tutor
develop
MacTech Quarterly
APDALog

... Specific Articles
Using Model-View-Controller in MacApp, Robin Alger, Frame Works
Palette Manager, Dave Van Brink, develop magazine Vl, #1
Braving Offscreen Worlds, Guerremo Ortiz, develop magazine Vl, #1
~

HyperCard Stacks
Macintosh Graphics Primer
TechN otes Stack
Macintosh Q&A Stack
Human Interface Notes Stack

Index

A
Abstract differentiation
irregular shapes, 270-284
overview, 256
regular shapes, 256-270
selection tools, 284-309
Abstract superclass, 234, 254
Activate events, 221-222
Additive color, 94
addPin I addOver mode, 128
adMax I adMin mode, 128-129
aGDevice, 175
Alias
overview, 326-328
rasterizing, 328-331
regions, 331-332
. waveforms, 329
alignPix, 176
Altering images with CopyBits()
color separation, 320
colorizing, 320-321, 322-326
posterizing, 322
Anchored-line drawing tool, 265-270
Anchored-line sketching, 267
And-intersect, 32

Animating palette entry, 186-187,
194
Animation, 195-196
Ant pattern logic, 298
Ant patterns, 295
Antialiased lines, 332-334
Antialiased text, 334-338
Antialiasing by oversampling, 330
Application traps, 389
Arcs and wedges, 55-57
Arithmetic drawing. See adMax I
adMin
Arithmetic modes, 127-133
ArtToy, 205-207
Atomic data types, 20
Attributes
computer-generated shapes, 29
font, 64
GDevice, 109, 113
AugmentWindow(), 245

B
baseAddr, 28, 29
BasicMouseTool class, 253
BitMap data structure, 28
411

412

.,.. Index

Bitmap font, 64
BitMaps, 28-29, 63
BitMapToRgnO trap, 350-352
bkColor, 318
Blend mode, 129-130
Blend transfer mode, 132
•
Blitters, 157
Blitting routine, 157-158
Border, 29
Bottleneck, 77-78, 160-163
Boundaries and coordinates, 73-75
Bounding box, 44
bounds, 28, 29, 137
boundsRect, 175
Brightness, 93

c
'cctb' type, 203
CDEF, 215
'cdev', 215
CGrafPort
associating palettes with, 192
data structure, 122-124
PixPats, 147
Chroma, 93
Chromaticity and primary colors,
94-96
Chunky, 139
CIE chromaticity diagram, 94
Class family tree, 266
Classic color model, 89, 92
Classic QuickDraw, 84
Clip, 176
Clipboard operations, 230
Clipping, 75-77, 211, 319
clipRgn, 76, 210, 317
CLUT color model, 90
cmpCount, 138
cmpSize, 138
CMY colorspace, 104
'CNTL' resource, 203
Collected points, 270-284

Color
addition, 128
animation, 186-187
blending, 130
chromaticity, 95
contention, 181
cycling, 195
display limits, 99-100
mapping, 88
requests, 182-183
separation, 320, 323
software components of, 82-89
subtraction, 128
theory, 93-100
thresholding, 129
updates, 184
Color analysis
custom, 369-376
median cut, 367-369
popular, 367
Color-inhibited, 187
Color Lookup Table, 90
Color Manager, 87
Color mapping
GDevice ColorTables, 113-114
inverse tables, 114-119
overview, 113
search and complement procedures, 119-122
Color models
classic, 92
direct, 90-91
fixed,92
indexed, 89-90
overview, 89
Color patterns
CGrafPort PixPats, 147
custom PixPats, 148
overview, 146
PixPats, 147
Color Picker, 87, 100-104
Color QuickDraw, 84, 86

~

ColorBank values, 371
Colorizing
overview, 320-321
techniques, 322-326
with CopyBits(), 401
Colorspace, 100
ColorTable
ctSeed ID numbers, 201-202
data structure, 104-105
GDevice, 203
specialized, 201-204
user interface, 203-204
colrBit, 318
Comments, 13
Compatibility
hardware configuration, 386392
overview, 385
software, 393-397
summary, 404
32-bit addressing issues, 397402
Configuration
hardware, 386-392
overview, 385
requirements, 396-397
software compatibility, 393-397
summary, 404
32-bit addressing issues, 397402
Content region, 210
Control Manager, 20
Control Panel, 217
Control points, 29
Conversions
CTable, 189
Depth, 338-349
palette, 189
PostScript conversion, 21-22
QuickDraw-to-PostScript, 21-22
Coordinate systems, 73-75
CopyBits(), 149-150, 152-156

Index

413

CopyBits() spatial scaling, 151
CopyDeepMask(), 314
CopyMask(), 314
Courteous colors, 186, 193
'CPMT' resource, 369
Create(), 238-239
CreateRes(), 238-239
cTable argument, 175
CTable conversions, 189
ctFlags, 105
ctSeed, 105
ctSize, 105
ctTable, 105
Current GDevice, 109
Custom color selection, 369-376
Custom PixPats, 148
CWindowRecord data structure,
208-209
Cyan-magenta-yellow colorspace,
104

D

DI A, 166
Data structures
BitMap, 28
CGrafPort, 122-124
ColorTable, 104
CWindowRecord, 208-209
GDevice, 107
GrafPort, 70-71, 122-124
InverseTable, 114
pattern, 34
Pictlnfo, 361
picture, 65
PixMap, 136-137
PixPat, 146
polygon, 53
print, 232-233
Rect, 40
Region, 43
RGBColor, 97
versus objects, 16-20

414

~

Index

Data types, 20
Debugging, 14
Depth conversion and dithering
CopyBits(), 342-343
depth conversion cases, 338-341
dithered patterns, 348-349
error diffusion, 341-342
image resizing, 343-348
overview, 338
Desktop interactions
display boundaries, 224-226
windows, palettes, and
monitors, 226-227
Destination ColorTable, 319
destRect, 315
Device loop traps, 352-355, 366
Device loops, 352-355
Device-relative, 147
Dialog Manager, 21
Dialogs, 213
Difference, 32
Difference image, 135
Difference pattern, 298
DiffRgn, 47-48
Digital images, 26, 135-136
Digital-to-analog hardware, 166
Direct color, 90, 99
Direct color model, 89-91
Direct GDevices, 193-194
Direct images, 346
Direct depth conversion, 340
Dispatch() routine, 371
Display boundaries, 224-226
Display control
application display, 178-180
ColorTables, 201-204
GDevice settings, 178-179
GWorlds, 170-178
HasDepth() and SetDepth(),
179-180
overview, 165-170
Palette Manager, 180-201

Dispose(), 238
Dither
CopyBits(), 342-343
error diffusion, 341-342
flag bits, 176
image resizing, 343-348
overview, 338
patterns, 348-349
shrinking, 346
DoClipCopy(), 240-241
Document organization
rasterizing, 228-229
rendering techniques, 229-230
Document windows, 213
DoEvent(), 241-242
DoPrint(), 240-241
DoUpdate(), 240-241
Drag region, 209
Dragging
outline, 300
selected pixels, 304-305
selected region, 300-307
DRAM, 400, 402
DrawChar(), 58-59
Drawing, color
ColorTables, 104-105
digital images, 135-136
GrafPorts, 122-135
graphic devices, 106-122
models, 89-92
overview, 81,
patterns, 146-148
picker, 100-104
pixels, 148-163
PixMaps, 136-146
software components, 82-89
summary, 163-164
theory, 93-100
Drawing technique
basic operations, 29
GrafPort, 69-78
overview, 23

IJJ.

raster graphics, 24-29
summary, 78
using shapes, 29-69
Drawing tools
irregular shapes, 270-284
overview, 256
regular shapes, 256-270
selection tools, 284-309
DrawPicture() trap, 349-350
Drawstring(), 58-59
DrawText(), 59
dstMap, 314-315

Index

415

Fixed, 20
Fixed color model, 89, 92
Flicker, 166-168
float, 20
Focused views, 220
Font, 60
Font attributes, 64
Font Manager, 21
Frame, 166
Frame (GraNerb), 30-31
FrameRgn, 44
Framing, 42
Free-line drawing, 279-281

E
Empty rects, 52
Encapsulation, 227
Entry
color, 185-186
stealing, 183-184
tolerance, 187
usage, 186-187
Erase (GraNerb), 30-31
EraseRgn, 44
Error diffusion, 341-342
Error reporting, 88
Error traps, 88
Explicit arguments
image buffers, 314-315
mask region, 317
rectangles, 315
transfer mode, 315-317
Explicit color, 186, 194
Extended, 20

F
False-color images, 136
fgColor, 318
Fill (GraNerb), 30-31
Fillets, 42
Filling pattern, 29
FillRgn, 44
FindWindowEvent(), 241-242

G
GDevice. See Graphics Devices
gdFlags, 113, 175
gdPMap, 108
gdRect, 108
gdType, 108
GetGWWorld(), 247
GetRenderBounds(), 239-240
Global arguments
"theGDevice", 319
"thePort" ,· 317-319
Go away box, 209
GrafPort
bottleneck procedures, 77-78
boundaries and coordinates,
73-75
clipping, 76-77
color, 122-135
data structure of, 70-71, 122-124
drawing technique, 69-78
overview, 69-73
regions, 212
visible area, 75
GraNerbs, 30-31
Graphics devices
accessing the GDevice list, 111112
attributes, 109, 113

416

~

Index

color mapping, 113-122
ColorTables, 203
ColorTables and color
mapping, 113-114
creation and initialization, 109111
data structure, 107
list, 109, 111-112
Manager, 86-87, 107-113
overview, 106
settings, 178-179
Graphics environments, 2, 4-12
Graphics, mouse-based
drawing tools and abstract
differentiation, 256-309
overview, 249-250
sketching, 250-256
summary, 310
tools, 250
Graphics programming, 1-22
Graphics techniques
ArtToy, 205-207
document organization, 227230
GWorld window object, 243-247
overview, 205
printing, 230-234
summary, 247
window fundamentals, 207227
window object, 234-242
Graphics Toolbox, 82-88
grayishTextOr, 130
Grayscale-inhibited, 187
Grayscale remapping, 325
Grow icon, 209
GWorld
components, 171-173
errors, testing for, 173-174
NewGWorld() and UpdateGWorld(), 175-176

overview, 170
PixMap alignment, 176-177
PixMapHandle, 172-173
purgeable and locked PixMaps,
177-178
stretch, clip, and dither, 176
techniques, 173-178
usage summary, 178
using, 170-173
window object, 243-247

H
Handle-based access, 108
Handles, 43
Hard ware configuration
overview, 386
well-behaved application traps,
389
well-behaved applications, 387392
HasDepth(), 179-180
hblank, 166
Heap memory requirements, 396
Hidden colors, 115, 117
HidePen, 46
Highlighting color, 127-128
Hilite, 130
Horizontal and vertical scaling, 151
Horizontal blanking interval, 166
hRes, 138, 160
HSL colorspace, 103
HSV colorspace, 103
Hue, 93

Image buffer, 137
Image buffers: srcMap, maskMap,
dstMap, 314-315
Image compositing, 314
Image processing
aliasing, 326-332

~

antialiased lines, 332-334
antialiased text, 334-338
deep PixMaps on Classic
machines, 349-350
depth conversion and
dithering, 338-349
device loops, 352-355
overview, 311-312
pixel-processing traps, 312-326
summary, 355
Image resizing
dithered smoothing, 347-348
image shrinking, 344-347
image stretching, 344
Index space, 134-135
Indexed color model, 89-91
Indexed depth conversion, 339
Indexed images, 345
Indexed PixMap, 152
Inherit, 243
Init(), 238
Inset, 32
InsetRgn, 49
Instance variables, 16
Integer, 20
International Utilities, 22
Inverse tables
index, 116
index values, 117
installing, 118
resolution, 115
using, 118
InverseTable data structure, 114
Invert (GraNerb), 30-31
Inverting, 322
InvertRgn, 44
Irregular shapes
free-line drawing, 279-281
over:view, 270
polygon drawing, 281-284
IsEmptyShape, 32
IsWindowEvent(), 241-242

Index

417

L
Lasso
ArtToy's, 292-294
deep pixels, 289-292
monochrome, 288-289
Lightness, 103
Line-drawing traps, 38-39
Lines, 38-39
Location (pen), 33
Locked PixMaps, 177-178
Logical transfer modes, 133-135
long, 20
long fixed point, 20
long floating point, 20
Longlnt, 20
long integer, 20

M
Macintosh graphics environments,
4-9
Main GDevice, 109
Managers
Color, 87
Control, 20
Dialog, 21
Font, 21
Graphic Device, 86-87, 107-113
International Utilities, 22
Memory, 21
Palette, 87, 180-201
Print, 21-22
Process, 6
Resource, 21
Slot, 86
TextEdit, 21
Toolbox, 9, 20-22
Window,20
Window trap, 234
Mapped color model, 90
MapRgn, 49
Marquee,286-287
Mask region, 317

418

~

Index

maskMap, 314-315
maskRect, 315
Median cut color selection, 367-369
Memory management, 88
Memory Manager, 21
Methods, 16
Modal control panels, 214
Modeless control panels, 214
Monitor configurations, 397
Mouse-based graphics
drawing tools, 256-309
overview, 249-250
sketching, 250-256
tools, 250
Mouse-based objects, 253-256
Multi-bit pixels, 88-89
MultiFinder see: Process Manager

N
Naming conventions, 14-15
Nested structures, 88
NewGWorld(), 175-176
NewPtr(), 28
NewRgn,47
NotPatBic, 36
notPatCopy, 36
NotPatOr, 36
NotPatXor, 36
NotSrcBic, 36
NotSrcCopy, 36
N otSrcOr, 36
N otSrcXor, 36
NULL, 13
NULL pointer references, 88

0
Object-oriented programming software, 15-20
Objects
GWorld window, 243~247
mouse-based, 253-256
RectangleTool, 262-265

versus data structures, 16-20
window, 234-242
Offscreen drawing
application display, 178-180
basic procedures, 168-170
ColorTables, 201-204
flicker, 166-168
GWorlds, 170-178
overview, 165-170
Palette Manager, 180-201
summary, 204
video display, 166
Offscreen PixMaps, 142-146
offscreenGWorld, 175
Offset, 32
OffsetRgn, 49
1-bit images, 345
OOPS, 15-20
OpColor(), 132
Operand color, 127
Or-union, 32
Outline font, 64
Oval shapes, 42
OvalTool class, 260-261
OvalTool Draw() methods, 261
Override, 243

p
'PACK' resource, 358
packType, 139
Paint (GrafVerb), 30-31
Paint application, ArtToy, 205-207
PaintRgn, 44
Palette Manager
basic concepts, 181-187
earlier versions, 190-191
overview, 180-181
traps, 187-189
using palettes, 191-201
Palettes
activation, 189
animation, 195-196

..,. Index

assignment, 188
associating with windows,
191-192
CGra£Ports, 192
conversions, 189
creating, 187
data structure, 185
direct GDevices, 193-194
disposing, 187
earlier versions, 190
entry control, 189
'pltt' resources, 194-195
usages and tolerances, 192
windows, 191-192
patBic, 36
patCopy, 36
patOr, 36
Pattern (pen), 33, 34
Pattern data structure, 34
patXor, 36
Pen
color control, 126
color traps, 124
sizes, 33
transfer modes, 36
Pens and PenStates, 33-38
PenState
location, 33
pattern, 33, 34
size, 33
transfer mode, 35-36
visibility, 33
picFrame, 383
PicHandle argument, 364
picSave, 318
picSize field, 67
PICT data format, 360
Pict opcodes, 360
Pictlnfo data structure, 361
Picture data structure, 65
Picture Utilities, 87, 358-376

419

Pictures
deep PixMaps on Classic
machines, 376-384
limits, 68-69
overview, 65-67, 357-358
picture utilities, 358-376
resources, 68
summary, 384
Pixel image buffer, 137
Pixel index value, 114
Pixel-processing traps
altering images with CopyBits(), 320-326
CopyDeepMaskO and CopyMask(), 314
explicit arguments, 314-317
global arguments, 317-319
overview, 312-313
Pixel value mapping, 88-89
pixelDepth, 175
Pixels, 26
Pixels, moving
CopyBits(), 149-150, 152-156
performance, 157-160
PixMap resolution, 160-163
scaling, 151
StdBits() bottleneck, 160-163
pixelSize, 138
pixelType, 139
PixMap
alignment, 176-177
creating, 142-143
data structure, 136-140
drawing, in color, 136-146
GWorld PixMapHandle, 172
indexed, 152
management, 140-141
memory diagram, 141
offscreen, 142-146
on Classic machines, 349-350,
376-384

420

~

Index

overview, 136-137
purgeable and locked, 177-178
resolution, 160-163
traps, 140-141
PixPat data structure, 146
PixPat traps, 147
PixPats, custom, 148
planeBytes, 139
'pltt' resources, 194-195
pmReserved, 140
pmTable, 140
pmVersion, 140
PointlnShape, 32
Points, 26-27
Polygon
data structure, 53
drawing, 281-284
traps, 54-55
Popular color selection, 366-367
Port-relative, 147
Posterizing, 322
PostScript translation, 21-22, 63
PrCloseDoc(), 233
PrClosePage(), 234
PrDefault(), 233
PrGeneral(), 234
Print Manager, 21-22
Print
data structures, 232-233
overview, 230-232
rendered documents, 230
traps, 233-234
Private GDevice, 109
PrJobDlog(), 233
Process Manager, 6
Programming
atomic data types, 20
naming conventions, 14-15
object-oriented, 15-19
practical guidelines, 12-20
PrOpenDoc(), 233
PrOpenPage(), 234

PrStlDlog(), 233
PrValidate(), 233
PtlnRect(), 52
PtlnRgn(), 52
Public GDevice, 108
Public methods
AugmentWindow(), 245
GetGWWorld(), 247
Render(), 245-246
SetOffGWorld(), 247
SetScreenGWorld(), 247
Purgeable PixMaps, 177-178

Q
qdGraNars, 78
qdProcsPtr, 77
QuickDraw-to-PostScript translation, 21-22, 63
QuickDraw versions, 84-86

R
RAM, 396-397
Raster graphics
BitMaps, 28-29
digital images, 26
overview, 24-25
points, 26-27
Raster-scan displays, 24
Rasterizing, 328-331
Real, 20
Rect data structure, 40
Rectangle-based shapes
emptiness, 52
overview, 41-42
region calculation traps, 49-50
region problems, 53
regions, 43-46
regions and set theory traps,
47-48
using, 50-51
Rectangles: srcRect, maskRect,
destRect, 315

~

RectangleTool class, 260-261
RectangleTool Draw() methods, 261
RectangleTool object, 262-265
Rectangular marquee, 286-287
Rectangular shapes, 258-262
RectMouseTool sketch() method,
259-260
Region
aliased, 331-332
bounding box, 43
calculation traps, 49-50
clipping, 211, 319
content, 210
creating, 45
data structure, 43
drag, 209
dragging, 300-307
GrafPort, 212
mask, 317
rectangle-based, 43-50
structure, 209
theRgn instance variable, 285,
287
update, 211-213
visible, 210, 319
window, 209-213
RegularMouseTool class, 257-258
Regular shapes
anchored-line drawing tool,
265-270
RectangleTool, 262-265
rectangular, 258-262
Render(), 239-240, 245-246
Resolution, 27, 160-163
Resource Manager, 21
rgbBkColor, 318
RGB color
addition, 128
blending, 130
cube, 97-98
overview, 93-94
subtraction, 128

Index

421

thresholding, 129
values, 97-99
RGBColor data structure, 97
rgbFgColor, 318
rgnBBox, 43
rgnData, 45
RgnHandles, 43
Rounded rectangles, 41
Routine, 24
rowBytes, 28, 137-138
Running ants, 295-299

s
Saturation, 93
Scaling, 151
Scan line, 166
Screen font, 63
Search and complement procedures, 119-122
Search procedure
drawing and, 120
example, 121-122
techniques, 121
traps, 121
SearchProcs, 120
SectRgn, 47-48
Selection tools
dragging a selected region,
300-307
lasso, 288-295
rectangular marquee, 286-287
running ants, 295-299
using, 308-309
Set theory traps, 47-48
SetDepth(), 179-180
SetOffGWorld(), 247
SetScreenGWorld(), 247
Shapes
arcs and wedges, 55-57
attributes, 29
GraNerbs, 30-32
irregular, 270-284

422

..,. Index

lines, 38-39
pens and PenStates, 33-38
Pictures, 65-69
polygons, 53-55
rectangle-based, 41-53
rectangles, 40-41
regular, 256-270
text, 57-65
short, 20
short fixed point, 20
short floating point, 20
ShowPen(), 46
Shrinking, 344-347
Size (pen), 33
Sketching, 250-256
Slot Manager, 86
SmallFract, 20
Smoothing, 347-348
Software compatibility
detecting System Software
versions, 394-396
imposing configuration
requirements, 396-397
overview, 393-394
srcBic, 36
srcCopy, 36, 62
srcMap, 314-315
srcOr, 36, 62
srcRect, 315
srcXor, 36
StdBits() bottleneck, 160-163
StdText() bottleneck, 132
Stretch, 176
Stretch traps, 313, 338
Stretching, 344
Structure region, 209
subPin I subOver, 128
Subpixel stretching, 347
Subtractive color, 94
Super slot space, 399
Support, 1

System (color selection) method,
366
System 7 QuickDraw, 86
System Software versions
detecting, 394-396
no color or 32-bit QuickDraw,
394-395
old, 396
overview, 394

T
Text
mixed typefaces, 60-63
overview, 57-58
traps, 58-59, 61
typeface management, 63-65
TextBox(), 59
TextEdit, 21
"theGDevice", 319
"thePort", 317-319
theRgn instance variable, 285, 287
32-bit addressing
history, 398
mode, 400-402
overview, 397-398
video display memory, 399400
32-bit QuickDraw, 86
Tolerant colors, 186, 193
Tool palettes, 213
Toolbox Managers, 9, 20-22
Tools
anchored-line drawing, 265270
drawing, 256-309
Graphics Toolbox, 82-88
mouse-based, 250
palettes, 213
selection, 284-309
Toolbox, 9, 20-22
TPrlnfo, 232

.,.. Index

TPrint, 232
TPrPort, 233
Transfer mode
argument, 315-317
arithmetic, 127-133
logical, 133-135
overview, 127
pen, 35-36
Translation, 21-22, 27
Transparent, 130
Trap, 24
Traps
application, 389
BitMapToRgn(), 350-352
device loop, 352-355, 366
DrawPicture(), 349-350
error, 88
line-drawing, 38-39
Palette Manager, 187-190
pen color, 124
pixel-processing, 312-326, 338
PixMaps management, 140141
PixPat, 147
polygon, 54-55
print, 233-234
region calculation, 49-50
search procedure, 121
set theory, 47-48
stretch, 313, 338
text, 58-59, 61
well-behaved application, 389
window, 210
Window Manager, 234
True color, 98
24-bit color, 98
Type size, 60
Type style, 60
Typeface control, 62
Typefaces, 60-65

423

u
Undersampled, 328
Unfocused views, 220
UnionRgn, 47-48
Update events, 222-224, 229-230
Update region, 211-213, 223
UpdateGWorld(), 175-176
User alerts, 214
User interface ColorTables, 203204

v
vblank, 166
Vertical blanking interval, 166
Video display, 166
Video display memory, 399-400
Video display scan pattern, 166
Video RAM, 107
Views, 215
Virtual method, 238, 239
Visibility (pen), 33
Visibility, 75
Visible area, 75
Visible region, 210, 319
visRgn, 75, 210, 223, 317
VRAM, 107
vRes, 138, 160

w
WaitMouseUp() loop, 251-252
WDEF,223
Wedges, 55-57
Where field, 26
Window fundamentals
color requests, 182-183
desktop interactions, 224-227
event-handling techniques,
221-224
focusing, 218-221
graphic foundations, 208-209

424

~

Index

Manager, 20
Managertraps,234
overview, 207-208
regions, 209-213
traps, 210
types and presentation, 213
views, 214-217
Window object
class definition, 235-237

objectives, 234
public methods, 238-242

x
Xor, 32
XorRgn, 47-48

z
Zoom/unzoom box, 209

Titles in the Macintosh Inside Out Series
.,. Extending the Macintosh® Toolbox
PrOgramming Menus, Windows, Dialogs, and More
John C. May and Judy B. Whittle
A complet_eguide to programming the Macintosh interface.
352 pages, $24:95, paperback, order #57722
,

.

.,. Programming QuickDrawnr'
Includes Color QuickDraw and 32-Bit QuickDraw
David A. Surovell, Fred M. Hall, and Konstantin Othmer
The first in-depth reference to the Macintosh graphics system.
352 pages, $24.95, paperback, order #57019
.,. Programming for System 7
Gary Little and Tim Swihart
A complete programmer's handbook to the newest version of the Macintosh system software.
400 pages, $26.95, paperback, order #56770
.,. Programming with AppleTalk®
Michael Peirce
An accessible guide to creating applications that run with AppleTalk.
352 pages, $24.95, paperback, order #57780 .
.,. The AfUX® 2.0 Handbook
Jan L. Harrington
A complete and up-to-date introduction to UNIX on the Macintosh.
448 pages, $26.95, paperback, order #56784
.,. System 7 Revealed
Anthony Meadow
A first look inside the important new Macintosh system software from Apple.
368 pages, $22.95, paperback, order #55040
.,. ResEdit™ Complete
Peter Alley and Carolyn Strange
Contains the popular ResEdit software and complete information on how to use it.
576 pages, $29.95, book/disk, order #55075
.,. The Complete Book of HyperTalk® 2
Dan Shafer
Practical guide to HyperTalk 2.0 commands, operators, and functions.
480 pages, $24.95, paperback, order #57082
.,. Programming the LaserWriter®
David A. Holzgang
Now Macintosh programmers can unlock the full power of the LaserWriter.
480 pages, $24.95, paperback, order #57068
.,. Debugging Macintosh® Software with MacsBug
Includes MacsBug 6.2
Konstantin Othmer and Jim Straus
Everything a programmer needs to start debugging Macintosh software.
576 pages, $34.95, book/ disk, order #57049

.,. Developing Object-Oriented Software for the MacintoSh®
Analysis, Design, and Programming
Neal Goldstein and Jeff Alger
An in-depth look at object-oriented programming on the Macintosh.
352 pages, $24.95, paperback, order #57065

'-,

.,. Writing Localizable Software for the Macintosh®
-Daniel R. Carter
A step-by-step guide which opens up international markets to Macintosh software developers.
352 pages, $24.95, paperback, order #57013
.,. Programmer's Guide to MPW®, Volume I
Exploring the Macintosh® Programmer's Workshop
Mark Andrews
Essential guide and reference to the standard Macintosh software development system, MPW.
608 pages, $26.95, paperback, order #57011
·
.,. Elements of C++ Macintosh® Programming
~
Dan Weston
~
Teaches the basic elements of C++ programming, concentrating on object-oriented style and syntax.
512 pages, $22.95, paperback, order #55025
.,. Programming with MacApp®
David A. Wilson, Larry S. Rosenstein, and Dan Shafer
Hands-on tutorial on everything you need to know about MacApp.
576 pages, $24.95, paperback, order #09784
576 pages, $34.95, book/ disk, order #55062
.,. C++ Programming with MacApp®
David A. Wilson; Larry S. Rosenstein, and Dan Shafer
Learn the secrets to unlocking the power of MacApp and C++.
624 pages, $24.95, paperback, order #57020
624 pages, $34.95, book/ disk, order #57021

Order Number Quantity Price

Total

- - -- - - - -- - - - -- - --

-

TOTAL ORDER

---

Shipping and state sales tax will be added
automatically.
Credit card orders only please.
Offer good in USA only. Prices and availability subject to change without notice.

Name
Address

City /State/Zip
Signature (required)
_Visa

_MasteJCard

Account#
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company
Order~ent

Routel
Reading, MA 01867
To order by phone, call (617) 944-3700

_AmEx

Exp. Date

Programming QuickDraw™ - The Disk
All the programs and routines listed in this book are available on disk, in source code
form, directly from the authors.
The disk includes the following materials:
• all source code in the book
• the complete ArtToy paintbox application source and resources, including many
familiar sketching and selection tools
• GrafPort and GDevice management routines
• "useful" region generation routines
• regular polygon generation routines
• color pattern ('ppat') resizing and resource 1/0 routines
• color palette animation examples
To order the disk, simply clip or photocopy this entire page and complete the coupon
below. Enclose a check or money order for $25.00 in U.S. funds made payable to David
·
Surovell. Michigan residents add 4% state sales tax.
David Surovell
1322 Miller
Ann Arbor, MI USA 48103

Please send me a copy of the Programming QuickDraw™ disk. I am enclosing the
amount of $25.00 in U.S. funds, plus applicable Michigan state sales tax.

Address:~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

City: ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
State/Province:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Country:~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Zip Code:~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Programming QuickDraw·
D AV ID

A .

S UROV E LL

F R E D E RICK M . HALL
KO NS T A NTIN
OTHM E R
H ere is the first in-depth, practical
guide to QuickDraw ™, the heart of the
Macintosh®graphics system and the
foundation of the intuitive Macintosh
user interface. Every Macintosh
programmer developing applications
needs to learn how to program with
QuickDraw in order to develop
Macintosh software effectively.

Programming QuickDraw takes
Macintosh programmers of all levels
through the powerful features and
capabilities of QuickDraw, including
the newest improvements of Color
QuickDraw"', 32-bit QuickDraw"', and
System 7 . T he book begins with the
basics of fundamental QuickDraw
concepts and functions, and then
covers more advanced topics in detail,
including color mapping, off-screen
drawing, palettes, printing, and picture
analysis. Special sections also provide
useful, hands-on tips and techniques
for avoiding potential problems.

• Perfo rm sophisticated image
processing operations with
CopyBits() and CopyD eepMask()
• Enable your applications to
take advantage of QuickDrawcompliant graphics hardware
and accelerators.
This thorough coverage of vital
QuickDraw concepts and
features makes Programming
QuickDraw an essential
resource fo r all Macintosh
programmers.

David A. Surovell and
Frederick M. Hall are
expert Macintosh graphics
programmers specializing
in graphic-intensive software
development. Konstantin
Othmer is a Software
Engineer at Apple Computer,
Inc., and is the Project
Leader for QuickDraw
in System 7.

You will also learn how to:
• Build co lor pictures on the
Macintosh Classic
• Maintain the highest degree of
compatibility for your applications
across the Macintosh platform

9 78020 1 570199
Cover design by Ronn Ca mp isi
Addi son-Wesley Publishi ng Company, Inc.

IS BN 0-201-57019 -X
570 19

